Hegel on Sankhya-Yoga

Sankhya and likewise the other Indian systems of Philosophy,
occupy themselves particularly with the three qualities (Guna)
of the Absolute Idea, which are represented as substances
and as modifications of nature.

It is noteworthy that in the observing consciousness of the Indians
it struck them that what is true and in and for itself
contains three determinations,
and the Notion of the Idea is perfected in three moments.

This sublime consciousness of the trinity,
which we find again in Plato and others,
then went astray in the region of thinking contemplation
and retains its place only in Religion,
and there but as a Beyond.

Then the understanding penetrated through it,
declaring it to be senseless;
and it was Kant who broke open the road once more
to its comprehension.

The reality and totality of the Notion of everything,
considered in its substance, is absorbed by
the triad of determinations;
and it has become the business of our times
to bring this to consciousness.

SK 29.

trayasya svalaksanyam vritti sa esa asamanya bhavati
samanya karana-vritti pranadhyah-vayavah-panca

Of the three internal instruments,
their own characteristics are their functions;
this is peculiar to each.
The common modification of the instruments is the five airs
such as prana and the rest.

YS III.9

vyutthana-nirodha-samskarayor abhibhava-pradur-bhavau
nirodha-kshana-cittanvayo nirodha-parinama

YS III.10

tasya prasanta-vahita samskarat

Manas, the understanding, first the faculty for
the cognition of the general (of rules)

a. The concept as such

SK 30.

drste catustayasya tu yugapat vrttih tasya kramasasca nirdista
tatha api adrste trayasya vrttih tat purvika

Of all the four, the functions are said to be simultaneous and also successive
with regard to the seen objects;
with regard to the unseen objects
the functions of the three are preceeded by that.

YS III.11

sarva-arthata-ekagratayo kshayodayau cittasya samadhi-parinama

The logical form of all judgments consists of
the objective unity of the apperception of the concepts contained therein

Ahamkara, the determinative power of judgment,
second the faculty for the subsumption of the particular under the general

b. Judgment

SK 31.

svam svam vrittim pratipadyante paraspara akuta hetukam
purushartha eva hetu na kenacit karanam karyate

Instruments enter into their respective functions
being incited by mutual impulse.
The purpose of the Spirit is the sole motive
(for the activities of the instruments).
By none whatsoever is an instrument made to act.

YS III.12

tata punashantoditau tulya-pratyayau cittasya-ekagrata-parinama

Buddhi, reason, third the faculty for the determination of
the particular from the general (for the derivation from principles)

c. Syllogism

SK 32.

karanam trayodasavidham tad aharana dharana prakasakaram
tasya karyam ca dasadha aharyam dharyam prakasyam ca

Instruments are of thirteen kinds performing the functions of
seizing, sustaining and illuminating.
Its objects are of ten kinds, vis
the seized, the sustained, and the illumined.

YS III.13

etena bhutendriyesu dharma-laksana-vastha-parinama vyakhyata

a. Mechanism

SK 33.

antahkaranam trividham bahyam dasadha trayasya visayakhyam
bahyam sampratakalam abhyantaram karanam trikalam

The internal instruments are three-fold.
The external are ten-fold;
they are called the objects of the three (internal instruments).
The external instruments function at the present time and
the internal instruments function at all the three times.

YS III.14

shantoditavyapadesya-dharmanupati dharmi

b. Chemism

SK 34.

Tesam panca buddhi visesa-avisesa-visaya
Vak sabda-visaya-bhavati sesani tu pancavisayani

Of these, the five organs of knowledge have as their objects
both the specific and the general.
Speech has speech as its object;
the rest have all the five as its object.

YS III.15

kramanyatvam parinamanyatve hetu

c. Teleology

SK 35.

yasmat buddhi santahkarana sarvam visayam avagahate
tasmat trividham karanam dvari sesani dvarani

Since buddhi along with the other internal instruments
comprehends all of the objects these three instruments are
like the warders while the rest are like the gates.
