
Transcendental Logic
First Division

The Transcendental Analytic
This Analytic is the analysisa of the entirety of our a priori cognition
into the elements of the pure cognition of the understanding. It is con­
cerned with the following points: I .b That the concepts be pure and not
empirical concepts. 2 . That they belong not to intuition and to sensibility, but rather to thinking and understanding. 3 . That they be ele­
mentary concepts, and clearly distinguished from those which are
derived or composed from them. 4. That the table of them be complete,
and that they entirely exhaust the entire field of pure understanding.
Now this completeness of a science cannot reliably be assumed from a
rough calculation of an aggregate put together by mere estimates;
hence it is possible only by means of an idea of the whole of the a priori cognition of the understanding, and throughC the division of concepts that such an idea determines and that constitutes it, thus only
through their connection in a system. The pure understanding separates itself completely not only from everything empirical, but even
from all sensibility. It is therefore a unity that subsists on its own, which
is sufficient by itself, and which is not to be supplemented by any external additions. Hence the sum total of its cognition will constitute a
system that is to be grasped and determined under one idea, the com­
pleteness and articulation of which system can at the same time yield a
touchstone of the correctness and genuineness of all the pieces of cognition fitting into it. This whole part of the transcendental logic, however, consists of two books, the first of which contains the concepts of
pure understanding, the second its principles.
a Zergliederung
b The numeral " 1 . " is missing in the second edition.
, Added in the second edition.

201

A6S

B 90

Transcendental Analytic
First Book
The Analytic of Concepts. °

A66

B 91

I understand by an analytic of concepts not their analysis, or the usual
procedure of philosophical investigations, that of analyzingh the content
of concepts that present themselves and bringing them to distinctness,
but rather the much less frequently attempted analysisC of the faculty
of understanding itself, in order to research the possibility of a priori
concepts by seeking them only in the understanding as their birthplace
and analyzing its pure use in general; for this is the proper business of
a transcendental philosophy; the rest i s the logical treatment o f con-

a

The following notes appear at this point in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"We remarked above that experience consists of synthetic propositions, and how
synthetic a posteriori propositions are possible is not to be regarded as a question re­
quiring a solution, since it is a fact.
"Now it is to be asked how this fact is possible.
"Experience consists of judgments, but it is to be asked whether these empirical
judgments do not in the end presuppose a priori (pure) judgments. The analysis
[Analysis] of experience contains, first, its analysis [Zergleiderung] insofar as judgments
are in it; second, beyond the a posteriori concepts also a priori concepts.
"The problem is: How is experience possible? 1. vVhat does the understanding do
in judgments in general? 2. What do the senses do in empirical judgments? 3. In em­
pirical cognition, what does the understanding, applied to the representations of the
senses, do in order to bring forth a cognition of objects [Objecte] ?
"One sees at first that experience is only possible through synthetic a pri01'i propo­
sitions. Hence a priori principles [Principien] are 1 . immanent: in accordance with use;
2. it is to be asked, whether they are also transcendent.
"The test for whether something is also experience, i.e., a fact, is as it were experi­
mentation with the universal propositions under which the particular empirical judg­
ment belongs. If the latter cannot stand under a universal rule for judging, if no concept
can be made out of that, then it is a vitium subreptionis [vicious fallacy] . Why in supersti­
tion and credulity." (E XXXIII, pp. 2 1-2; 2 3 :24-5)

b zergliedern
, Zergliederung

2 02

Div. I. Transcendental Analytic

cepts in philosophy in general. We will therefore pursue the pure con­
cepts into their first seeds and predispositions in the human under­
standing, where they lie ready, until with the opportunity of experience
they are finally developed and exhibited in their clarity by the very same
understanding, liberated from the empirical conditions attaching to
them.

203

The Analytic of Concepts
First Chapter
On the Clue to the Discovery of all
Pure Concepts of the Understanding

A67
B 92

If one sets a faculty of cognition into play, then on various occasions dif­
ferent concepts will become prominent that will make this faculty
known and that can be collected in a more or less exhaustive treatise de­
pending on whether they have been observed for a longer time or with
greater acuteness. Where this investigation will be completed can never
be determined with certainty by means of this as it were mechanical
procedure. Further, the concepts that are discovered only as the opportunity arises will not reveal any order and systematic unity, but will
rather be ordered in pairs only according to similarities and placed in
series only in accord with the magnitude of their content, from the sim­
ple to the more composite, which series are by no means systematic
even if to some extent methodically produced.
Transcendental philosophy has the advantage but also the obligation
to seek its concepts in accordance with a principle,a since they spring
pure and unmixed from the understanding, as absolute unity, and must
therefore be connected among themselves in accordance with a concept
or idea. Such a connection, however, provides a rule by means of which
the place of each pure concept of the understanding and the complete­
ness of all of them together can be determined a priori, which would
otherwise depend upon whim or chance.
On the Transcendental Clue for the Discovery of all Pure
Concepts of the Understanding
First Section
On the logical use of the understanding
in general.

A68

The understanding has been explained above only negatively, as a non­
sensible faculty of cognition. Now we cannot partake of intuition indea Princip

204

Section 1. On the logical use of the understanding in general

pendently of sensibility. The understanding is therefore not a faculty of
intuition. But besides intuition there is no other kind of cognition than
through concepts. Thus the cognition of every, at least human, under­
standing is a cognition through concepts, not intuitive but discursive.
All intuitions, as sensible, rest on affections, concepts therefore on
functions. By a function, however, I understand the unity of the action
of ordering different representations under a common one. Concepts
are therefore grounded on the spontaneity of thinking, as sensible intuitions are grounded on the receptivity of impressions. Now the under­
standing can make no other use of these concepts than that of judging
by means of them. Since noa representation pertains to the object im­
mediately except intuition alone, a concept is thus never immediately
related to an object, but is always related to some other representation
of it (whether that be an intuition or itself already a concept).b Judgment
is therefore the mediate cognition of an object, hence the representation of a representation of it. In every judgment there is a concept that
holds of many, and that among this many also comprehends a given
representation, which is then related immediately to the object.5 So in
the judgment, e.g., "All bodies are divisible,"c the concept of the di­
visible is related to various other concepts; among these, however, it is
here particularly related to the concept of body, and this in turn is related to certain appearances d that come before us. These objects are
therefore mediately represented by the concept of divisibility. All judgments are accordingly functions of unity among our representations,
since instead of an immediate representation a higher one, which com­
prehends this and other representations under itself, is used for the cognition of the object, and many possible cognitions are thereby drawn
together into one. We can, however, trace all actions of the under­
standing back to judgments, so that the understanding in general can
be represented as a faculty for judging. For according to what has been
said above it is a faculty for thinking. Thinking is cognition through
concepts. Concepts, however, as predicates of possible judgments, are
related to some representation of a still undetermined object. The concept of body thus signifies something, e.g., metal, which can be cognized through that concept. It is therefore a concept only because other
representations are contained under it by means of which it can be reIn his copy of the first edition, Kant inserts here the word "other" (E XXIV; p. 2 3 ;
2 3 :45)·
b Kant's copy of the first edition replaces this parenthetical aside with the following
words, without parentheses: "which itself contains intuition only mediately or immedi­
ately" (E xxxv, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 :45)·
, Teilbar, rather than veranderlich, following the fourth edition.
d Kant's copy of the first edition changes "appearances" to "intuitions" (E XXXVI , p. 2 3 ;
2 3 :45)·
a

205

B 93

A69
B 94

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

lated to objects. It is therefore the predicate for a possible judgment,
e.g., "Every metal is a body." The functions of the understanding can
therefore all be found together if one can exhaustively exhibit the func­
tions of unity in judgments. The following section will make it evident
that this can readily be accomplished.
On the Clue to the Discovery of all Pure
Concepts of the Understanding
Second Section

<§ 9 . > a

On the logical function of the understanding
in judgments.
If we abstract from all content of a judgment in general, and attend only
to the mere form of the understanding in it, we find that the function
of thinking in that can be brought under four titles, each of which con­
tains under itself three moments. They can suitably be represented in
the following table.6
I.

Quantity o fJudgments
Universal
Particular
Singular
2.

3·

Quality
Mfirmative
Negative
Infinite

Relationb
Categorical
Hypothetical
Disjunctive
4·
Modality
Problematic
Assertoric
Apodictic

B 96
A7I

Since this division seems to depart in several points, although not es­
sential ones, from the customary technique of the logicians, the follow­
ing protests against a worrisome misunderstanding are not unnecessary.
a Here Kant resumes the numbering of paragraphs begun in the "Transcendental

Aesthetic" in the second edition. This will continue through the end of the "Transcen­
dental Deduction."
b Here Kant uses the latinate word Relation instead of either Beziehung or Verhidtnis.

2 06

Section II. On the logical function in judgments

I . The logicians rightly say that in the use of judgments in syllogisms
singular judgments can be treated like universal ones. For just because
they have no domain at all, their predicate is not merely related to some
of what is contained under the concept of the subject while being ex­
cluded from another part of it. The predicate therefore holds of that
concept without exception, just as if the latter were a generally valida
concept with a domain with the predicate applying to the whole of what
is signified. b If, on the contrary, we compare a singular judgment with a
generally valid one, merely as cognition, with respect to quantity," then
the formerd relates to the latter as unity relates to infinity, and is therefore in itself essentially different from the latter. Therefore, if! consider
a singular judgment ( judicium singulare) not only with respect to its
internal validity, but also, as cognition in general, with respect to the
quantitye it has in comparison with other cognitions, then it is surely i
different from generally valid judgments (judicia communia), and deserves a special place in a complete table of the moments of thinking in
general (though obviously not in that logic that is limited only to the B 97
use of judgments with respect to each other).
2 . Likewise, in a transcendental logic infinite judgments must also
be distinguished from affirmative ones, even though in general logic A 72
they are rightly included with the latter and do not constitute a special
member of the classification. General logic abstracts from all content of
the predicate (even if it is negative), and considers only whether it is at­
tributed to the subject or opposed to it. Transcendental logic, however,
also considers the value or content of the logical affirmation made in a
judgment by means of a merely negative, predicate, and what sort of
gain this yields for the whole of cognition,Jf I had said of the soul that
it is not mortal, then I would at least have avoided an error by means of
a negative judgment. Now by means of the proposition "The soul is not
mortal" I have certainly made an actual affirmation as far as logical form
is concerned, for I have placed the soul within the unlimited domain of
undying beings. Now since that which is mortal contains one part of the
whole domain of possible beings, but that which is undying! the other,
a

ge11leingiiltiger. While this would normally be translated "commonly valid," in this con­
text it clearly refers to the universal (allge11lein) judgment; we have used "generally" to
preserve this reference while still marking the difference from allge11lein.
b von dessen ganzer Bedeutung; here Kant uses Bedeutung, as Frege was later to use it, to
mean the reference or denotation of a concept; more typically, he uses it to mean some­
thing closer to what Frege called Sinn or sense, that is, the connotation.

, Grofle

d The text has

sie rather than es, but in spite of the shift in gender there is nothing for the
pronoun to refer to except "a singular judgment."

, Grofle

f In the second edition, Nichtsterbende; in the first, Nichtsterbliche, or "immortal."

207

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk I. Ch. I

B 98
A 73

B 99

A 74

nothing is said by my proposition but that the soul is One of the infinite
multitude of things that remain if I take away everything that is mortal.
But the infinite sphere of the possible is thereby limited only to the ex­
tent that that which is mortal is separated from it, and the soul is placed
in the remaining space of its domain.a But even with this exception this
space still remains infinite, and more parts could be taken away from it
without the concept of the soul growing in the least and being affirma­
tively determined. In regard to logical domain, therefore, this infinite
judgment is merely limiting with regard to the COntent of cognition in
general, and to this extent it must not be omitted from the transcen­
dental table of all moments of thinking in judgments, since the function
of understanding that is hereby exercised may perhaps be important in
the field of its pure a priori cognition.7
3. All relationsb of thinking in judgments are those a) of the predicate
to the subject, b) of the ground to the consequence, and c) between the
cognition that is to be divided andc all of the members of the division.
In the first kind of judgment only two concepts are considered to be in
relation to each other, in the second, two judgments, and in the third,
several judgments. The hypothetical proposition "If there is perfect jus­
tice, then obstinate evil will be punished" really contains the relation of
two propositions, "There is a perfect justice" and "Obstinate evil is pun­
ished." Whether both of these propositions in themselves are true re­
mains unsettled here. It is only the implication that is thought by means
of this judgment. Finally, the disjunctive judgment contains the relations
of two or more propositions to One another, though not the relation of
sequence, but rather that of logical opposition, insofar as the sphere of
one judgment excludes that of the other, yet at the same time the rela­
tion of community, insofar as the judgments together exhaust the sphere
of cognition proper; it is therefore a relation of the parts of the sphere
of a cognition where the sphere of each part is the complement of that
of the others in the sum total of the divided cognition, e.g., "The world
exists either through blind chance, or through inner necessity, or
through an external cause." Each of these propositions occupies one
part of the sphere of the possible cognition about the existence of a
world in general, and together they occupy the entire sphere. To remove
the cognition from one of these spheres means to place it in one of the
a Following the first edition, Raum ihres Umfangs, rather than the second, Umfangs ihres
b

C

Raums.
Verhaltnisse; although he is now speaking of the functions of judgment the table had
listed under the latinate heading Relation, Kant now reverts to Verhaltnis, and in the re­
mainder of this paragraph Verhaltnis is translated by "relation." Kant's reversion to
Verhaltnis here is consistent with his use of this term elsewhere, since he is talking of the
relation of parts of judgments to each other rather than to us.
Kant's copy of the first edition replaces "and" with "of" (E XXXVI I, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 :45).

208

Section II. On the logical function in judgments

others, and to place it in one sphere, on the contrary, means to remove
it from the others. In a disjunctive judgment there is therefore a certain
community of cognitions, consisting in the fact that they mutually ex­
clude each other, yet thereby determine the true cognition in its en­
tirety, since taken together they constitute the entire content of a
particular given cognition.8 And this is also all that I find it necessary to
remark upon for the sake of what follows."
4. The modality of judgments is a quite special function of them,
which is distinctive in that it contributes nothing to the content of the
judgment (for besides quantity, quality, and relationb there is nothing
more that constitutes the content of a judgment), but rather concerns
only the value of the copula in relation to thinking in genera1.9
Problematic judgments are those in which one regards the assertion 6fdenial as merely possible (arbitrary). Assertoric judgments are those in
which it is considered actual (true). Apodictic judgments are those in
which it is seen as necessary. * Thus the two judgments whose relation
constitutes the hypothetical judgment (antecedens and consequens), as well
as those in whose reciprocal relatione the disjunctive judgment consists
(the members of the division), are all merely problematic. In the above
example the proposition "There is a perfect justice" is not said assertorically, but is only thought of as an arbitrary judgment that it is possible
that someone might assume, and only the implication is assertoric. Thus
such judgments can be obviously false and yet, if taken problematically,
conditions of the cognition of truth. Thus the judgment "The world
exists through blind chance" is of only problematic significance in the
disjunctive judgment, that is, someone might momentarily assume this
proposition, and yet it serves (like the designation of the false path
among the number of all of those one can take) to find the true one. The
problematic proposition is therefore that which only expresses logical
possibility (which is not objective), i.e., a free choice to allow such a
proposition to count as valid, a merely arbitrary assumption of it in the
understanding. The assertoric proposition speaks of logical actuality or
truth, as say in a hypothetical syllogism the antecedent in the major
premise is problematic, but that in the minor premise assertoric, and in* It is just as if in the first case thought were a function of the understanding,
in the second of the power of judgment, and in the third of reason. This is
a remark the elucidation of which can be expected only in the sequel.
n

b

The following note occurs in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Judgments and proposi­
tions are different. That the latter are verbis expressa [explicit words] , since they are as­
sertoric" (E XXXVIII, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 :25).

Verhdltnis
, Wechselwirkung
209

B r oo

A 75

B IO I

A 76

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

dicates that the proposition is already bound to the understanding ac­
cording to its laws; the apodictic proposition thinks of the assertoric one
as determined through these laws of the understanding itself, and as
thus asserting a priori, and in this way expresses logical necessity. Now
since everything here is gradually incorporated into the understanding,
so that one first judges something problematically, then assumes it as­
sertorically as true, and finally asserts it to be inseparably connected
with the understanding, i.e., asserts it as necessary and apodictic, these
three functions of modality can also be called so many moments of
thinking in general.
B I02

On the Clue to the Discovery of all Pure
Concepts of the Understanding
Third Section
<§ I O. >
On the pure concepts of the understanding
or categories.
As has already been frequently said, general logic abstracts from all con­

A 77

E

I03

tent of cognition, and expects that representations will be given to it
from elsewhere, wherever this may be, in order for it to transform them
into concepts analytically. Transcendental logic, on the contrary, has a
manifold of sensibility that lies before it a priori, which the transcendental aesthetic has offered to it, in order to provide the pure concepts
of the understanding with a matter, without which they would be with­
out any content, thus completely empty. Now space and time contain a
manifold of pure a priori intuition, but belong nevertheless among the
conditions of the receptivity of our mind, under which alone it can re­
ceive representations of objects, and thus they must always also affect
the concept of these objects. Only the spontaneity of our thought re­
quires that this manifold first be gone through, taken up, and combined
in a certain way in order for a cognition to be made out of it. I call this
action synthesis.
By synthesis in the most general sense, however, I understanda the
action of putting different representations together with each other and
comprehending their manifoldness in one cognition. Such a synthesis is
pure if the manifold is given not empirically but a priori (as is that in
space and time). Prior to all analysis of our representations these must
first be given, and no concepts can arise analytically as far as the COlla In his copy of the first edition, Kant changes this sentence to this point to "1 under­

stand by synthesis, however, the action through which synthetic judgments come to be,
in the general sense, .
" (E XXXIX, p. 2 3 ; 2 3 '45). Kant also adds the words
"Combination, composition, and nexus" (E XL, p. 24)·
.

.

2 10

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

a

tent is concerned. The synthesis of a manifold, however, (whether it
be given empirically or a priorz) first brings forth a cognition, which to
be sure may initially still be raw and confused, and thus in need of
analysis; yet the synthesis alone is that which properly collects the elements for cognitions and unifies them into a certain content; it is therefore the first thing to which we have to attend if we wish to judge about
the first origin of our cognition.
Synthesis in general is, as we shall subsequently see, the mere effect
of the imagination, of a blind though indispensable function of the
souI,b without which we would have no cognition at all, but of which we
are seldom even conscious. Yet to bring this synthesis to concepts is a
function that pertains to the understanding, and by means of which it
first provides cognition in the proper sense."
Now pure synthesis, generally represented, yields the pure concept of the understanding. By this synthesis, however, I understand that
which rests on a ground of synthetic unity a priori; thus our counting (as
is especially noticeable in the case of larger numbers) is a synthesis in
accordance with concepts, since it takes place in accordance with a
common ground of unity (e.g., the decad). Under this concept, therefore, the synthesis of the manifold becomes necessary.
Different representations are brought under one concept analyti­
cally (a business treated by general logic). Transcendental logic, how­
ever, teaches how to bring under concepts not the representations but
the pure synthesis of representations. The first thing that must be
given to us a priori for the cognition of all objects is the manifold of
pure intuition; the synthesis of this manifold by means of the imagination is the second thing, but it still does not yield cognition. The
concepts that give this pure sythesis unity, and that consist solely in the
representation of this necessary synthetic unity, are the third thing necessary for cognition of an object that comes before us, and they depend
on the understanding. 1 0
The same function that gives unity to the different representations in
a judgment also gives unity to the mere synthesis of different representations in an intuition, which, expressed generally, is called the pure
concept of understanding. I I The same understanding, therefore, and indeed by means of the very same actions through which it brings the logical form of a judgment into concepts by means of the analytical unity,
also brings a transcendental content into its representations by means of
a In the first edition, the right-hand running head is " Section III. On the pure concepts
b

of understanding or categories"
In his copy of the first edition Kant replaces this clause with "of a function of the un­
derstanding" (E XLI, p. 24; 2 3 :45).

, in eigentlicher Bedeutung
211

A 78

B I04

A 79

B IOS

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

A80

the synthetic unity of the manifold in intuition in general, on account of
which they are called pure concepts of the understanding that pertain to
objects a a priori; this can never be accomplished by universal logic.
In such a way there arise exactly as many pure concepts of the un­
derstanding, which apply to objects of intuition in general a priori, as
there were logical functions of all possible judgments in the previous
table: for the understanding is completely exhausted and its capacity b
entirely measured by these functions.c Following Aristotle we will call
these concepts categories, for our aim is basically identical with his al­
though very distant from it in execution.d

B 106

Table of CategoriesIZ
I.

O f Quantity
Unity
Plurality
Totality
2.

3·
Of Relation'
Of Inherence and Subsistence
(substantia et accidens)
Of Causality and Dependence
(cause and effect)
Of Community (reciprocity
between agent and patient)

Of Quality
Reality
Negation
Limitation

4·
Of Modality
. Possibility - Impossibility
Existence - Non-existence
Necessity - Contingency
n

Objecte

b Vermijgen

, gedachte Functionen

,I The following notes precede the ensuing table of the categories in Kant's copy of tbe

first edition:
"Logical functions are only forms for tbe relation of concepts in tbinking. Categor­
ies are concepts, through which certain intuitions are determined in regard to tbe syn­
thetic unity of tbeir consciousness as contained under tbese functions; e.g., what must
be tbought as subject and not as predicate." (E XLII, p. 24; 2 3 :25)
"On the use of the categories in tbe division of a system.
"On tbe analytic of tbe categories and tbe predicables.
"On a characteristic of concepts; of intellectual, empirical, and pure sensible represen­
tations.

,

" - Lex originaria: concept of tbe understanding." (E XLIII, p. 2 4; 2 3: 2 5)
Relation
2 12

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

Now this is the listing of all original pure concepts of synthesisa that
the understanding contains in itself a priori, and on account of which it
is only a pure understanding; for by these concepts alone can it understand something in the manifold of intuition, i.e., think an objectb for
it. This division is systematically generated from a common principle,"
namely the faculty for judging (which is the same as the faculty for
thinking), and has not arisen rhapsodically from a haphazard search for
pure concepts, of the completeness of which one could never be certain,
since one would only infer it through induction, without reflecting that
in this way one would never see why just these and not other concepts
should inhabit the pure understanding. ruistotle's search for these fun­
damental concepts was an effort worthy of an acute man. But since he
had no principle,d he rounded them up as he stumbled on them, and
first got up a list of ten of them, which he called categories (predicaments). Subsequently he believed that he had found five more of them,
which he added under the name of post-pre dicaments. But his table still
had holes. Further, it also included several modi of pure sensibility
(quando, ubi, situs, as well as prius, simul,) e as well as an empirical one
(motus)/ which do not belong in this ancestral registryg of the under­
standing; derivative concepts were also included among the primary
ones (actio, passio),h and several of the latter were entirely missing.
For the sake of the primary concepts it is therefore still necessary to
remark that the categories, as the true ancestral conceptsi of pure un­
derstanding, also have their equally pure derivativej concepts, which
could by no means be passed over in a complete system of transcen­
dental philosophy, but with the mere mention of which I can be satisfied in a merely critical essay.
Let me be allowed to call these pure but derivative concepts the
predicables of pure understanding (in contrast to the predicaments). If
one has the original and primitive concepts, the derivative and subalternate ones can easily be added, and the family treek of pure under­
standing fully illustrated. Since I am concerned here not with the
a

The words "of synthesis" are stricken in Kant's copy of the first edition ( E XLIV, p. 24;
2 3 :46).

b Object

, Princip
d Principium

That is, the concepts of when, where, and position, and the relations of priority and simultaneity.
f motion
e

g
h

Stammregister
action, passion

, Stammbegriffe

J

k

Clearly emphasized only in the first edition.

Stammbaum
213

A8I
B 107

A82
B 108

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk 1. Ch. I

A83

B 1 09

completeness of the system but rather only with the principlesa for a
system, I reserve this supplementation for another job. But one could
readily reach this aim if one took the ontological textbooks in hand,
and, e.g., under the category of causality, subordinated the predicables
of force, action, and passion; under that of community, those of pres­
ence and resistance; under the predicaments of modality those of gen­
eration, corruption, alteration, and so on. The categories combined
either with the modis of sensibility or with each other yield a great mul­
titude of derivative a priori concepts, to take note of which and, as far as
possible, completely catalogue would be a useful and not unpleasant but
here dispensable effort.
I deliberately spare myself the definitions of these categories in this
treatise, although I should like to be in possession of them. 13 In the se­
quel I will analyze these concepts to the degree that is sufficient in relation to the doctrine of method that I am working up. In a system of
pure reason one could rightly demand these of me; but here they would
only distract us from the chief point of the investigation by arousing
doubts and objections that can well be referred to another occasion
without detracting from our essential aim. In any case, from the little
that I have here adduced it becomes clear that a complete lexicon with
all the requisite definitions should be not only possible but even easy to
produce. The headings already exist; it is merely necessary to fill them
out, and a systematic topic, such as the present one, will make it easy
not to miss the place where every concept properly belongs and at the
same time will make it easy to notice any that is still empty.b
<§ 1 1 . c
Subtle considerations about this table of categories could be made,
which could perhaps have considerable consequences with regard to the
scientific form of all cognitions of reason. For that this table is uncom­
monly useful, indeed indispensable in the theoretical part of philosophy
for completely outlining the plan for the whole of a science insofar
as it rests on a priori concepts, and dividing it mathematically in ac­
cordance with determinate principles,d is already self-evident from
the fact that this table completely contains all the elementary concepts
a

b

Principien

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"What are categories? - - That they extend only to objects of experience.
" I . Whence do they arise?
"
2 . How are they valid a priori of objects of experience?" ( E XLV; pp. 24-5; 2 3 : 2 5)
, Sections I I and 1 2 were added in the second edition. This explains how Kant can refer
to the Metaphysical Foundations o/Natural SCience, not published until 1 786.

d

Principien
214

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

of the understanding, indeed even the form of a system of them in the
human understanding, consequently that it gives instruction about all
the moments, indeed even of their order, of a planned speculative science, as I have elsewhere given proof.* Now here are several of these
remarks.
The first is that this table, which contains four classes of concepts of
the understanding, can first be split into two divisions, the first of which
is concerned with objects of intuition (pure as well as empirical), the
second of which, however, is directed at the existence of these objects
(either in relation to each other or to the understanding).
I will call the first class the mathematical categories, the second, the
dynamical ones. As one sees, the first class has no correlates, which are
to be met with only in the second class. Yet this difference must have a
ground in the nature of the understanding.
Second remark: that each class always has the same number of cat­
egories, namely three, which calls for reflection, since otherwise all a
priori division by means of concepts must be a dichotomy. But here the
third category always arises from the combination of the first two in its
class.
Thus allness (totality) is nothing other than plurality considered as a
unity, limitation is nothing other than reality combined with negation,
community is the causality of a substance in the reciprocal determination of others, finally necessity is nothing other than the existence that
is given by possibility itself. But one should not think that the third category is therefore a merely derivative one and not an ancestral concept
of pure understanding. For the combination of the first and second in
order to bring forth the third concept requires a special act of the un­
derstanding, which is not identical with that act performed in the first
and second. Thus the concept of a number (which belongs to the category of allness) is not always possible wherever the concepts of multitude and of unity are (e.g., in the representation of the infinite); or
influence, i.e., how one substance can be the cause of something in another substance, is not to be understood immediately by combining the
concept of a cause and that of a substance. From this it is clear that a
special act of the understanding is requisite for this; and likewise in the
other cases.
Third remark: The agreement of a single category, namely that of
community, which is to be found under the third title, with the form
of a disjunctive judgment, which is what corresponds to it in the table
of logical functions, is not as obvious as in the other cases.
In order to be assured of this agreement one must note that in all dis­
junctive judgments the sphere (the multitude of everything that is con* Metaphysical Foundations ofNatural Science.
215

B I IO

B III

B I 12

B I IO

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk I. Ch. I

B II3

tained under it) is represented as a whole divided into parts (the subor­
dinated concepts), and, since none of these can be contained under any
other, they are thought of as coordinated with one another, not sub­
ordinated, so that they do not determine each other unilaterally, as in
a series, but reciprocally, as in an aggregate (if one member of the di­
vision is posited, all the rest are excluded, and vice versa).
Now a similar connection is thought of in an entirety of things,
since one is not subordinated,a as effect, under another, as the cause of
its existence, but is rather coordinatedb with the other simultaneously
and reciprocally as cause with regard to its determination (e.g., in a
body, the parts of which reciprocally attract yet also repel each other),
which is an entirely different kind of connection from that which is to
be found in the mere relation' of cause to effect (of ground to con­
sequence), in which the consequence does not reciprocally determine
the ground and therefore does not constitute a whole with the latter (as
the world-creator with the world). The understanding follows the same
procedure when it represents the divided sphere of a concept as when
it thinks of a thing as divisible, and just as in the first case the members
of the division exclude each other and yet are connected in one sphere,
so in the latter case the parts are represented as ones to which existence
(as substances) pertains to each exclusively of the others, and which are
yet connected in one whole.
§ 12.
But there is also yet another chapter in the transcendental philosophy
of the ancients that contains pure concepts of the understanding that,
although they are not reckoned among the categories, nevertheless ac­
cording to them should also count as a priori concepts of objects, in
which case, however, they would increase the number of the categories,
which cannot be. These are expounded in the proposition, so famous
among the scholastics: quodlibet ens est unum, verum, bonum.d Now al­
though the use of this principlee for inferences has turned out to be very
meager (they have yielded merely tautological propositions), so that in
modern times it has been customary to grant it a place in metaphysics
almost solely by courtesy, nevertheless a thought that has sustained it­
self so long, no matter how empty it seems, always deserves an investi­
gation of its origin, and justifies the conjecture that it must have its
" untergeordnet
b beygeordnet
, Verhaitnis

d Every being is one, true, and good.
e

Princips

2 16

Section III. On the pure concepts of the understanding

ground in some rule of the understanding, which, as so often happens,
has merely been falsely interpreted. These supposedly transcendental
predicates of things are nothing other than logical requisites and criteria of all cognition of things in general, and ground it in the categories
of quantity, namely, the categories of unity, plurality, and totality; yet
these categories must really have been taken as material, as belonging
to the possibility of things itself, when in fact they should have been
used in a merely formal sense, as belonging to the logical requirements
for every cognition; thus these criteria of thinking were carelessly made
into properties of things in themselves. In every cognition of an objecta
there is, namely, unity of the concept, which one can call qualitative
unity insofar as by that only the unity of the comprehensionb of the
manifold of cognition is thought, as, say, the unity of the theme in a
play, a speech, or a fable. Second, truth in respect of the consequences.
The more true consequences from a given concept, the more indication
of its objective reality. One could call this the qualitative plurality of
the marks that belong to a concept as a common ground (not thought
of in it as a magnitude). Third, finally, perfection, which consists in this
plurality conversely being traced back to the unity of the concept, and
agreeing completely with this one and no other one, which one can call
qualitative completeness (totality). From this it is obvious that these
logical criteria of the possibility of cognition in general transform the
three categories of magnitude,c in which the unity in the generation of
the magnituded must be assumed to be completely homogeneous, into
a principle ' with the quality of a cognition for the connection of het­
erogeneous elements of cognition into one consciousness also. Thus
the criterion of the possibility of a concept (not of its object)! is the definition, in which the unity of the concept, the truth of everything that
may initially be derived from it, and finally the completeness of everything that is drawn from it, constitute everything that is necessary for
the production of the entire concept; or the criterion of a hypothesis
"
is also the intelligibility of the assumel ground of explanation or its
unity (without auxiliary hypotheses), the truth (agreement with itself
and with experience) of the consequences that are derived from it, and
finally the completeness of the ground of explanation of these conse­
quences, which do not refer us back to anything more or less than was
already assumed in the hypothesis, and which merely analytically give
back a posteriori and agree with that which was thought synthetically a

a Objects

b Zusammenfassung

, Grofe
Quantum
, Princips
f Objects
d

217

B 1 14

B I I5

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk 1. Ch. I

priori. The transcendental table of the categories is thus not com­
pleted with the concepts of unity, truth, and perfection, as if it were
lacking something, but rather, the relationa of these concepts to objects b
being entirely set aside, our procedure with these concepts is only being
thought under general logical rules for the agreement of cognition with
itself.>
-

B I 16

Verhiiltnis
b Objecte
a

218