
The Transcendental Analytic
Second Chapter
On the Deduction of the Pure Concepts of
the Understanding

First Section
<§ 1 3 ·>a
On the
principlesb of a transcendental deduction in general. '4
cJurists, when they speak of entitlements and claims, distinguish in a
legal matter between the questions about what is lawfuld (quidjuris) and
a

b

Paragraph number added in the second edition. In the first edition, the second chapter
of the "Transcendental Analytic," the "Transcendental Deduction," is divided into three
main sections, the first of which is in turn subdivided into two subsections. Apart from
a few minor changes in wording, which will be noted, and the addition of the section
numbers themselves, the two subsections of the first section are retained in the second
edition and are identical until the last paragraph of their second subsection, which is re­
placed by three new paragraphs in the second edition. The second and third sections of
the chapter in the first edition are then replaced by an entirely new second section in
the second edition, which is broken up into numbered paragraphs § ' 5 through § 2 7 .
We will present all o f this material i n the following sequence: the first section a s it ap­
peared in both editions, with the last paragraph of the first-edition version followed by
the last three paragraphs that replaced it in the second edition; the second and third sec­
tions as they appeared in the first edition; then the second section, consisting of num­
bered parts § ' 5 through § 2 7 , as it appeared in the second edition.

Principien

, The following notes are inserted here in Kant's copy of the first edition:
"Consciousness and inner sense are different. 'I think' is spontaneity and does not
depend on any object. The representation, however, with which I think, must be given
to me antecedently in intuition (through imagination). With regard to it I am affected."
(E XLVI, p. 25; 2 3 =26)
"It must be proved that if there were no sensible intuition a priori, and if this were
not the form of sensibility in the subject, with which all appearances must be in accord,
then:
" 1 . No categories would have significance.
" 2 . From mere categories no synthetic a priori propositions at all would be possible."
(E XLVII, p. 2 5 ; 2 3 '26)
d

was Rechtens ist

2 19

A 84

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II

B II7

A8S

B I 18

A86

that which concerns the fact (quid facti), and since they demand proof
of both, they call the first, that which is to establish the entitlement or
the legal claim, the deduction.'s We make use of a multitude of em­
pirical concepts without objection from anyone, and take ourselves to
be justified in granting them a sense and a supposed signification even
without any deduction, because we always have experience ready at
hand to prove their objective reality. But there are also concepts that
have been usurped, such as fortune and fate, which circulate with al­
most universal indulgence, but that are occasionally called upon to es­
tablish their claim by the question quid juris, and then there is not a
little embarrassment about their deduction because one can adduce no
clear legal ground for an entitlement to their use either from experience
or from reason.
Among the many concepts, however, that constitute the very mixed
fabric of human cognition, there are some that are also destineda for
pure use a priori (completely independently of all experience), and these
always require a deduction of their entitlement, since proofs from ex­
perience are not sufficient for the lawfulness of such a use, and yet one
must know how these concepts can be related to objectsb that they do
not derive from any experience. I therefore call the explanation of the
way in which concepts can relate to objects a priori their transcenden­
tal deduction, and distinguish this from the empirical deduction,
which shows how a concept is acquired through experience and reflec­
tion on it, and therefore concerns not the lawfulness but the fact from
which the possession has arisen.
Now we already have two sorts of concepts of an entirely different
kind,c which yet agree with each other in that they both relate to objects
completely a priori, namely the concepts of space and time, as forms of
sensibility, and the categories, as concepts of the understanding. To seek
an empirical deduction of them would be entirely futile work, for what
is distinctive in their nature is precisely that they are related to their ob­
jects without having borrowed anything from experience for their rep­
resentation. Thus if a deduction of them is necessary, it must always be
transcendental.
Nevertheless, in the case of these concepts, as in the case of all cog­
nition, we can search in experience, if not for the principled of their
possibility, then for the occasional causes of their generation, where the
impressions of the senses provide the first occasion for opening the ena bestimmt
b Objecte

, Kant's copy of the first edition inserts: "They are not borrowed from experience"
(E XLVIII, p. 25; 2 3 :46).
d

Principium

220

Section 1. On the principles of a transcendental deduction

tire power of cognition to them and for bringing about experience,
which contains two very heterogeneous elements, namely a matter for
cognition from the senses and a certain fonn for ordering it from the
inner source of pure intuiting and thinking, which, on the occasion of
the former, are first brought into use and bring forth concepts. Such a
tracing of the first endeavors of our power of cognition to ascend from
individual perceptions to general concepts is without doubt of great
utility, and the famous Locke is to be thanked for having first opened
the way for this. Yet a deduction of the pure a priori concepts can never
be achieved in this way; it does not lie down this path at all, for in regard to their future use, which should be entirely independent of experience, an entirely different birth certificate than that of an ancestry
from experiences must be produced. I will therefore call this attempted
physiological derivation,1 6 which cannot properly be called a deduction
at all because it concerns a quaestio jacti,a the explanation of the possession of a pure cognition. It is therefore clear that only a transcendental
and never an empirical deduction of them can be given, and that in regard to pure a priori concepts empirical deductions are nothing but idle
attempts, which can occupy only those who have not grasped the entirely distinctive nature of these cognitions.
But now even if the sole manner of a possible deduction of pure a pri­
ori cognition is conceded, namely that which takes the transcendental
path, it is still not obvious that it is unavoidably necessary. We have
above traced the concepts of space and time to their sources by means
of a transcendental deduction, and explained and determined their a priori objective validity. Geometry nevertheless follows its secure course
through strictly a priori cognitions without having to beg philosophy for
any certification of the pure and lawful pedigree of its fundamental concept of space. Yet the use of theb concept in this science concerns only
the external world of the senses, of which space is the pure form of its
intuition, and in which therefore all geometrical cognition is immediately evident because it is grounded on intuition a priori, and the objects
are given through the cognition itself a priori in intuition (as far as their
form is concerned). With the pure concepts of the understanding,
however, there first arises the unavoidable need to search for the tran­
scendental deduction not only of them but also of space, for since they
speak of objects not through predicates of intuition and sensibility but
through those of pure a priori thinking, they relate to objects generally
without any conditions of sensibility; and since they are not grounded in
experience and cannot exhibit any objectC in a priori intuition on which
a As in the first edition; the second, declining quaestio, prints quaestionem.
b The first edition here reads

, Object

"dieses" instead of the second's "des. "

221

B 1 19

A 87

B 120

A88

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II

B121

A89

B 122

A90

to ground their synthesis prior to any experience, they not only arouse
suspicion about the objective validity and limits of their use but also
make the concept of space ambiguous by inclining us to use it beyond
the conditions of sensible intuition, on which account a transcendental
deduction of it was also needed above. Thus the reader must be con­
vinced of the unavoidable necessity of such a transcendental deduction
before he has taken a single step in the field of pure reason; for he would
otherwise proceed blindly, and after much wandering around would still
have to return to the ignorance from which he had begun. But he must
also clearly understand from the outset its inevitable difficulty, so that
he will not complain of obscurity where the subject-matter itself is
deeply veiled or become annoyed too soon over the removal of hindrances, since we must either surrender completely all claims to insights
of pure reason in its favorite field, namely that beyond the boundaries
of all possible experience, or else perfect this critical investigation.
In the case of the concepts of space and time, we were able above to
make comprehensible with little effort how these, as a priori cognitions,
must nevertheless necessarily relate to objects, and made possible a syn­
thetic cognition of them independent of all experience. For since an ob­
ject can appear to us only by means of such pure forms of sensibility,
i.e., be an objecta of empirical intuition, space and time are thus pure
intuitions that contain a priori the conditions of the possibility of ob­
jects as appearances, and the synthesis in them has objective validity.
The categories of the understanding, on the contrary, do not repre­
sent to us the conditions under which objects are given in intuition at
all, hence objects can indeed appear to us without necessarily having to
be related to functions of the understanding, and therefore without the
understanding containing their a priori conditions. '7 Thus a difficulty is
revealed here that we did not encounter in the field of sensibility, .
namely how subjective conditions of thinking should have objective
validity, i.e., yield conditions of the possibility of all cognition of
objects; for appearances can certainly be given in intuition without
functions of the understanding. I take, e.g., the concept of cause, which
signifies a particular kind of synthesis, in which given something A
something entirely different B is posited according to a rule.b It is not
clear a priori why appearances should contain anything of this sort (one
cannot adduce experiences for the proof, for the objective validity of
this a priori concept must be able to be demonstrated), and it is there­
fore a priori doubtful whether such a concept is not perhaps entirely
empty and finds no object anywhere among the appearances. For that
a Object
b Emended in Kant's copy of the first edition to "posited according to an a priori rule, i.e.,
necessarily" (E XLIX, p. 25; 2 3 '46).

222

Section 1. On the principles of a transcendental deduction

objects of sensible intuition must accord with the formal conditions of
sensibility that lie in the mind a priori is clear from the fact that otherwise they would not b e objects for us; but that they must also accord
with the conditions that the understanding requires for the synthetic
unitya of thinking is a conclusion that is not so easily seen.b For ap­
pearances could after all be so constituted that the understanding would
not find them in accord with the conditions of its unity, and everything
would then lie in such confusion that, e.g., in the succession of appearances nothing would offer itself that would furnish a rule of synthesis
and thus correspond to the concept of cause and effect, so that this concept would therefore be entirely empty, nugatory, and without significance. Appearances would nonetheless offer objects to our intuition, for
intuition by no means requires the functions of thinking.
If one were to think of escaping from the toils of these investigations
by saying that experience constantly offers examples of a regularity of
appearances that give sufficient occasion for abstracting the concept
of cause from them, and thereby at the same time thought to confirm
the objective validity of such a concept, then one has not noticed that
the concept of cause cannot arise in this way at all, but must either be
grounded in the understanding completely a priori or else be entirely
surrendered as a mere fantasy of the brain. For this concept always requires that something A be of such a kind that something else B follows
from it necessarily and in accordance with an absolutely universal
rule. Appearances may well offer cases from which a rule is possible in
accordance with which something usually happens, but never a rule in
accordance with which the succession is necessary; thus to the synthesis of cause and effect there attaches a dignity that can never be expressed empirically, namely, that the effect does not merely come along
with the cause, but is posited through it and follows from it. The strict
universality of the rule is therefore not any property of empirical rules,
which cannot acquire anything more through induction than comparative universality, i.e., widespread usefulness. But now the use of the pure
concepts of the understanding would be entirely altered if one were to
treat them only as empirical products.
Following Erdmann in reading "Einheit" for "Einsicht"; Kant uses "Einheit" in a parallel
fashion in the next sentence.
b Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "If I were simply to say that without the
connection of causes and effects I would not grasp the sequence of alterations, it would
not at all follow from this that this must be precisely as an understanding needs it to
be to grasp it, but I would not be able to explain whence they continuously follow one
another. Only I would not raise this question if I did not already have the concept of
cause and of the necessity of such persistence. A subjective necessity, habit, would
make it worse. An implanted necessity would not prove necessity." (E L, pp. 2 5-6;
2 3:26)
a

223

B 123

A91

B 124

A92

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. I. Ch. II

"Transition
to the transcendental deduction of the categories.

B 125

A 93

B 126

There are only two possible cases in which synthetic representation and
its objects can come together, necessarily relate to each other, and, as it
were, meet each other: Either if the object alone makes the representation possible, or if the representation alone makes the object possible.
If it is the first, then this relation is only empirical, and the representa­
tion is never possible a priori. And this is the case with appearance in re­
spect of that in it which belongs to sensation. But if it is the second,
then since representation in itself (for we are not here talking about its
causality by means of the will) does not produce its object as far as its
existence is concerned, the representation is still determinant of the
object a priori if it is possible through it alone to cognize something as
an object. But there are two conditions under which alone the cogni­
tion of an object is possible: first, intuition, through which it is given,
but only as appearance; second, concept, through which an object is
thought that corresponds to this intuition. It is clear from what has
been said above, however, that the first condition, namely that under
which alone objects can be intuited, in fact does lieh in the mind a pri­
ori as the ground of the form of objects.' All appearances therefore nec­
essarily agree with this formal condition of sensibility, because only
through it can they appear, i.e., be empirically intuited and given. The
question now is whether a priori concepts do not also precede, as con­
ditions under which alone something can be, if not intuited, neverthe­
less thought as object in general, for then all empirical cognition of
objects is necessarily i n accord with such concepts, since without their
presupposition nothing is possible as objectd of experience. Now,
however, all experience contains in addition to the intuition of the
senses, through which something is given, a concept of an object that
is given in intuition, or appears; I S hence concepts of objects in general
lie at the ground of all experiential cognition as a priori conditions; con­
sequently the objective validity of the categories, as a priori concepts,
rests on the fact that through them alone is experience possible (as far
as the form of thinking is concerned). For they then are related neces­
sarily and a priori to objects of experience, since only by means of them
can any object of experience be thought at all.
a No section number appears here in the second edition, but "§ 1 4" should have been
added to avoid an unnumbered section between § 13 and § 1 5 .

b Following Erdmann i n reading "liegt" for "liegen "; Kant seems to have confused the sin­

gular antecedent (Bedingnng) with the plural, perhaps because of the intervening occur­
rence of the plural "objects."
C

d

Objecten
Object
224

Section I. On the principles of a transcendental deduction

The transcendental deduction of all a priori concepts therefore has a
principle toward which the entire investigation must be directed,
namely this: that they must be recognized as a priori conditions of the
possibility of experiences (whether of the intuition that is encountered
in them, or of the thinking). '9 Concepts that supply the objective
ground of the possibility of experience are necessary just for that reason. The unfolding of the experience in which they are encountered,
however, is not their deduction (but their illustration), since they would
thereby be only contingent. Without this original relation to possible
experience, in which all objects o f cognition are found, their relation to
any objectb could not be comprehended at all.
{[There are, however, three original sources (capacities or faculties of
the soul), which contain the conditions of the possibility of all experience, and cannot themselves be derived from any other faculty of the
mind, namely sense, imagination, and apperception. On these are
grounded I) the synopsis of the manifold a priori through sense; 2 ) the
synthesis of this manifold through the imagination; finally 3) the unity
of this synthesis through original apperception. In addition to their
empirical use, all of these faculties have a transcendental one, which is
concerned solely with form, and which is possible a priori. We have dis­
cussed this with regard to the senses in the first part above, however,
we will now attempt to understand the nature of the two other ones.]
d<The famous Locke, from neglect of this consideration, and because
he encountered pure concepts of the understanding in experience, also
derived them from this experience, and thus proceeded so inconsistently that he thereby dared to make attempts at cognitions that go far
beyond the boundary of all experience. David Hume recognized that in
order to be able to do the latter it is necessary that these concepts would
have to have their origin a priori. But since he could not explain at all
how it is possible for the understanding to think of concepts that in
themselves are not combined in the understanding as still necessarily
combined in the object, and it never occurred to him that perhaps the
understanding itself, by means of these concepts, could be the originator of the experience in which its objects are encountered, he thus,
driven by necessity, derived them from experience (namely from a subjective necessity arisen from frequent association in experience, which
is subsequently falsely held to be objective, i.e., custom);e however he
a Principium
b

Object

, This paragraph in the first edition is omitted in the second and replaced by three that
here follow it.
d The next three paragraphs are added in the second edition, replacing the previous one.

, Gewohnheit

225

A 94

B 127

A 95
B I27

Doctrine of Elements. Pc II. Div. L Bk. I. Ch. II

B 128

B 129

A95

subsequently proceeded quite consistently in declaring it to be impos­
sible to go beyond the boundary of experience with these concepts and
the principles that they occasion. The empirical derivation,however, to
which both of them resorted, cannot b e reconciled with the reality of
the scientific cognition a priori that we possess, that namely of pure
mathematics and general natural science, and is therefore refuted by
the fact.a
The first of these two famous men opened the gates wide to enthu­
siasm, since reason, once it has authority on its side, will not be kept
within limits by indeterminate recommendations of moderation; the
second gave way entirely to skepticism, since he believed himself to
have discovered in what is generally held to be reason a deception of
our faculty of cognition. - We are now about to make an attempt to see
whether we cannot successfully steer human reason between these two
cliffs, assign its determinate boundaries, and still keep open the entire
field of its purposive activity.
I will merely precede this with the explanation of the categories.
They are concepts of an object in general, by means of which its intu­
ition is regarded as determined with regard to one of the logical func­
tions for judgments.2o Thus, the function of the categorical judgment
was that of the relationship of the subject to the predicate, e.g., "All
bodies are divisible." Yet in regard to the merely logical use of the un­
derstanding it would remain undetermined which of these two concepts
will b e given the function of the subject and which will b e given that of
the predicate. For one can also say: "Something divisible is a body."
Through the category of substance, however, if I bring the concept of
a body under it, it is determined that its empirical intuition in experi­
ence must always be considered as subject, never as mere predicate; and
likewise with all the other categories.>

The Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the
Understanding
Second Section
bOn the a priori grounds for the possibility

of experience.
It is entirely contradictory and impossible that a concept should be
generated completely a priori and be related to an object although it
a das Factum
b What follows is the version of the "Transcendental Deduction" as it appeared in the

first edition, where it is divided into the second and third sections of the present chap­
ter. In the second edition, these two sections will be replaced by a single second section,
divided into subsections numbered from § I S to § 2 7 . See B I 2 9-69 below.
226

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

neither belongs itself within the concept of possible experience nor
consists of elements of a possible experience. For it would then have no
content, since no intuition would correspond to it though intuitions in
general, through which objects can be given to us, constitute the field
or the entire object of possible experience. An a priori concept that was
not relateda to the latter would be only the logical form for a concept,
but not the concept itself through which something would be thought.
If there are pure a priori concepts, therefore, they can certainly con­
tain nothing empirical; they must nevertheless be strictly a priori condi­
tions for a possible experience, as that alone on which its objective
reality can rest.
Hence if one wants to know how pure concepts of the understanding
are possible, one must inquire what are the a priori conditions on which
the possibility of experience depends and that ground it even if one ab­
stracts from everything empirical in the appearances. A concept that ex­
presses this formal and objective condition of experience universally
and sufficiently would be called a pure concept of the understanding.
Once I have pure concepts of the understanding, I can also think up objects that are perhaps impossible, or that are perhaps possible in themselves but cannot be given in any experience since in the connection of
their concepts something may be omitted that yet necessarily belongs
to the condition of a possible experience (the concept of a spirit), or
perhaps pure concepts of the understanding will be extended further
than experience can grasp (the concept of God). But the elements for
all a priori cognitions, even for arbitrary and absurd fantasies, cannot indeed be borrowed from experience (for then they would not be a priori
cognitions), but must always contain the pure a priori conditions of a
possible experience and of an object of it, for otherwise not only would
nothing at all be thought through them, but also without data they
would not even be able to arise in thinking at all.
Now these concepts, which contain a priori the pure thinking in every
experience, we find in the categories, and it is already a sufficient de­
duction of them and justification of their objective validity if we can
prove that by means of them alone an object can be thought. But since
in such a thought there is more at work than the single faculty of thinking, namely the understanding, and the understanding itself, as a faculty
of cognition that is to be related to objects,b also requires an elucidation
of the possibility of this relation, we must first assess not the empirical
but the transcendental constitution of the subjective sources that comprise the a priori foundations for the possibility of experience.
If every individual representation were entirely foreign to the other, as
a beziige
b Objecte
227

A96

A97

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

A98

it were isolated and separated from it, then there would never arise any­
thing like cognition, which is a whole of compared and connected rep­
resentations. If therefore I ascribe a synopsis to sense, because it contains
a manifold in its intuition, a synthesis must always correspond to this,
and receptivity can make cognitions possible only if combined with
spontaneity. This is now the ground of a threefold synthesis, which is
necessarily found in all cognition: that, namely, of the apprehension of
the representations, as modifications of the mind in intuition; of the re­
production of them in the imagination; and of their recognition in the
concept.21 Now these direct us toward three subjective sources of cogni­
tion, which make possible even the understanding and, through the latter, all experience as an empirical product of understanding.

Preliminary reminder
The deduction of the categories is connected with so many difficulties,
and necessitates such deep penetration into the primary grounds of the
possibility of our cognition in general, that in order to avoid the long­
windedness of a complete theory and nevertheless not to omit anything
in such a necessary inquiry, I have found it more advisable to prepare
than to instruct the reader in the following four numbers, and only then
to represent the exposition of these elements of the understanding sys­
tematically in the immediately following third section.a For this reason
the reader should until then not be deterred by the obscurity that is ini­
tially unavoidable in a path that is thus far entirely unexplored, but
which will, as I hope, be completely illuminated in that section.

1.
On the synthesis
of apprehension in the intuition.

A 99

Wherever our representations may arise, whether through the influ­
ence of external things or as the effect of inner causes, whether they
have originated a priori or empirically as appearances - as modifications
of the mind they nevertheless belong to inner sense, and as such all of
our cognitions are in the end subjected to the formal condition of inner
sense, namely time, as that in which they must all be ordered, con­
nected, and brought into relations. This is a general remark on which
one must ground everything that follows. 2 2
Every intuition contains a manifold in itself, which however would
not be represented as such if the mind did not distinguish the time in
the succession of impressions on one another; for as contained in one
a

The third section, beginning at A I l S .

228

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

moment no representation can ever be anything other than absolute
unity. Now in order for unity of intuition to come from this manifold
(as, say, in the representation of space), it is necessary first to run
through and then to take together this manifoldness, which action I call
the synthesis of apprehension, since it is aimed directly at the intu­
ition, which to be sure provides a manifold but can never effect this as
such, and indeed as contained in one representation, without the oc­
currence of such a synthesis.
Now this synthesis of apprehension must also be exercised a priori,
i.e., in regard to representations that are not empirical. For without it
we could have a priori neither the representations of space nor of time,
since these can be generated only through the synthesis of the manifold
that sensibility in its original receptivity provides. We therefore have a
pure synthesis of apprehension.

A 100

2.
O n the synthesis
of reproduction in the imagination.
It is, to be sure, a merely empirical law in accordance with which rep­
resentations that have often followed or accompanied one another are
finally associated with each other and thereby placed in a connection in
accordance with which, even without the presence of the object, one of
these representations brings about a transition of the mind to the other
in accordance with a constant rule. This law of reproduction, however,
presupposes that the appearances themselves are actually subject to
such a rule, and that in the manifold of their representations an accom­
paniment or succession takes place according to certain rules; for with­
out that our empirical imagination would never get to do anything
suitable to its capacity,a and would thus remain hidden in the interior of
the mind, like a dead and to us unknown faculty. If cinnabar were now
red, now black, now light, now heavy, if a human being were now
changed into this animal shape, now into that one, if on the longest day
the land were covered now with fruits, now with ice and snow, then my
empirical imagination would never even get the opportunity to think of
heavy cinnabar on the occasion of the representation of the color red;
or if a certain word were attributed now to this thing, now to that, or if
one and the same thing were sometimes called this, sometimes that,
without the governance of a certain rule to which the appearances are
already subjected in themselves, then no empirical synthesis of repro­
duction could take place.
There must therefore be something that itself makes possible this ren Vermogen

229

A 101

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. 1. Ch. II <.A>

A I02

production of the appearances by being the a priori ground of a neces­
sary synthetic unity of them. One soon comes upon this if one recalls
that appearances are not things in themselves, but rather the mere play
of our representations, which in the end come down to determinations
of the inner sense. Now if we can demonstrate that even our purest a
priori intuitions provide no cognition except insofar as they contain the
sort of combination of the manifold that makes possible a thorough­
going synthesis of reproduction, then this synthesis of the imagination
would be grounded even prior to all experience on a priori principles,a
and one must assume a pure transcendental synthesis of this power,
which grounds even the possibility of all experience (as that which the
reproducibility of the appearances necessarily presupposes). Now it is
obvious that if I draw a line in thought, or think of the time from one
noon to the next, or even want to represent a certain number to myself,
I must necessarily first grasp one of these manifold representations after
another in my thoughts. But if I were always to lose the preceding rep­
resentations (the first parts of the line, the preceding parts of time, or
the successively represented units) from my thoughts and not repro­
duce them when I proceed to the following ones, then no whole repre­
sentation and none of the previously mentioned thoughts, not even the
purest and most fundamental representations of space and time, could
ever arise.
The synthesis of apprehension is therefore inseparably combined
with the synthesis of reproduction. And since the former constitutes the
transcendental ground of the possibility of all cognition in general (not
only of empirical cognition, but also of pure a priori cognition), the re­
productive synthesis of the imagination belongs among the transcen­
dental actions of the mind, and with respect to this we will also call this
faculty the transcendental faculty of the imagination.
3·
On the synthesis
of recognition in the concept.

A 103

WIthout consciousness that that which we think is the very same as
what we thought a moment before, all reproduction in the series of rep­
resentations would be in vain. For it would be a new representation in
our current state, which would not belong at all to the actb through
which it had been gradually generated, and its manifold would never
constitute a whole, since it would lack the unity that only consciousness
can obtain for it. If, in counting, I forget that the units that now hover
a Principien

b Actus; up to this point Kant has been using the word

230

Handlung.

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

before my senses were successively added to each other by me, then I
would not cognize the generation of the multitudea through this suc­
cessive addition of one to the other, and consequently I would not cog­
nize the number; for this concept consists solely in the consciousness of
this unity of the synthesis.
The word "concept" itself could already lead us to this remark. For it
is this one consciousness that unifies the manifold that has been suc­
cessively intuited, and then also reproduced, into one representation.
This consciousness may often only be weak, so that we connect it with
the generation of the representation only in the effect, but not in the
actb itself, i.e., immediately; but regardless of these differences one consciousness must always be found, even if it lacks conspicuous clarity, and
without that concepts, and with them cognition of objects, would be entirely impossible.
And here then it is necessary to make understood what is meant by
the expression "an object of representations." We have said above that
appearances themselves are nothing but sensible representations, which
must not be regarded in themselves, in the same way, as objects (outside
the power of representation). What does one mean, then, if one speaks
of an object corresponding to and therefore also distinct from the cog­
nition? It is easy to see that this object must be thought of only as some­
thing in general = X, since outside of our cognition we have nothing
that we could set over against this cognition as corresponding to it.
We find, however, that our thought of the relation of all cognition to
its object carries something of necessity with it, since namely the latter
is regarded as that which is opposed to our cognitions being determined
at pleasure or arbitrarily rather than being determined a priori, since in­
sofar as they are to relate to an object our cognitions must also necessarily agree with each other in relation to it, i.e., they must have that
unity that constitutes the concept of an object. 2 3
It is clear, however, that since we have to do only with the manifold
of our representations, and that X which corresponds to them (the ob­
ject), because it should be something distinct from all of our represen­
tations, is nothing for us, the unity that the object makes necessary can
be nothing other than the formal unity of the consciousness in the syn­
thesis of the manifold of the representations. Hence we say that we cog­
nize the object if we have effected synthetic unity in the manifold of
intuition. But this is impossible if the intuition could not have been pro­
duced through a function of synthesis in accordance with a rule that
makes the reproduction of the manifold necessary a priori and a concept
in which this manifold is united possible. Thus we think of a triangle as
a Menge
b

Actus
231

A 104

A 105

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. 1. Ch. II <A>

A 106

A 107

an object by being conscious of the composition of three straight lines
in accordance with a rule according to which such an intuition can al­
ways be exhibited. Now this unity of rule determines every manifold,
and limits it to conditions that make the unity of apperception possible,
and the concept of this unity is the representation of the object = X,
which I think through those predicates of a triangle.
All cognition requires a concept, however imperfect or obscure it
may be; but as far as its form is concerned the latter is always something
general, and something that serves as a rule. Thus the concept of body
serves as the rule for our cognition of outer appearances by means of
the unity of the manifold that is thought through it. However, it can be
a rule of intuitions only if it represents the necessary reproduction of
the manifold of given intuitions, hence the synthetic unity in the con­
sciousness of them. Thus in the case of the perception of something
outside of us the concept of body makes necessary the representation of
extension, and with it that of impenetrability, of shape, etc.
Every necessity has a transcendental condition as its ground. A tran­
scendental ground must therefore be found for the unity of the con­
sciousness in the synthesis of the manifold of all our intuitions, hence
also of the concepts of objectsa in general, consequently also of all ob­
jects of experience, without which it would be impossible to think of any
object for our intuitions; for the latter is nothing more than the some­
thing for which the concept expresses such a necessityb of synthesis.
Now this original and transcendental condition is nothing other than
the transcendental apperception.24 The consciousness of oneself in
accordance with the determinations of our state in internal perception
is merely empirical, forever variable; it can provide no standing or abid­
ing self in this stream of inner appearances, and is customarily called
inner sense or empirical apperception. That which should necessar-:­
ily be represented as numerically identical cannot be thought of as such
through empirical data. There must be a condition that precedes all ex­
perience and makes the latter itself possible, which should make such a
transcendental presupposition valid.
Now no cognitions can occur in us, no connection and unity among
them, without that unity of consciousness that precedes all data of the
intuitions, and in relation to which all representation of objects is alone
possible. This pure, original, unchanging consciousness I will now
name transcendental apperception. That it deserves this name is al­
ready obvious from this, that even the purest objective unity, namely
that of the a priori concepts (space and time) is possible only through
the relation of the intuitions to it. The numerical unity of this appera Objecte

b

Following Erdmann, reading Nothwendigkeit for Nothwendig.

232

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

ception therefore grounds all concepts a priori, just as the manifoldness
of space and time grounds the intuitions of sensibility.
Just this transcendental unity of apperception, however, makes out of
all possible appearances that can ever come together in one experience
a connection of all of these representations in accordance with laws. 2 5
For this unity of consciousness would be impossible if in the cognition
of the manifold the mind could not become conscious of the identity of
the function by means of which this manifold is synthetically combined
into one cognition. Thus the original and necessary consciousness of
the identity of oneself is at the same time a consciousness of an equally
necessary unity of the synthesis of all appearances in accordance with
concepts, i.e., in accordance with rules that not only make them necessarily reproducible, but also thereby determine an object for their intuition, i.e., the concept of something in which they are necessarily
connected; for the mind could not possibly think of the identity of itself in the manifoldness of its representations, and indeed think this a
priori, if it did not have before its eyes the identity of its action, which
subjects all synthesis of apprehension (which is empirical) to a tran­
scendental unity, and first makes possible their connection in accordance with a priori rules. Further, we are now also able to determine our
concepts of an object in general more correctly. All representations, as
representations, have their object, and can themselves be objects of
other representations in turn. Appearances are the only objects that can
be given to us immediately, and that in them which is immediately related to the object is called !ntuition. However, these appearances are
not things in themselves, but themselves only representations, which in
turn have their object, which therefore cannot be further intuited by us,
and that may therefore be called the non-empirical, i.e., transcendental
object = X 2 6
The pure concept of this transcendental object (which in all of our
cognitions is really always one and the same X) is that which in all of
our empirical concepts in general can provide relation to an object, i.e.,
objective reality. Now this concept cannot contain any determinate in­
tuition at all, and therefore concerns nothing but that unity which
must be encountered in a manifold of cognition insofar as it stands in
relation to an object. This relation, however, is nothing other than the
necessary unity of consciousness, thus also of the synthesis of the man­
ifold through a common function of the mind for combining it in one
representation. Now since this unity must be regarded as necessary a
priori (since the cognition would otherwise be without an object), the
relation to a transcendental object, i.e., the objective reality of our empirical cognition, rests on the transcendental law that all appearances,
insofar as objects are to be given to us through them, must stand under
a priori rules of their synthetic unity, in accordance with which their re-

A r a8

A 109

=

233

A I 10

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

lationa in empirical intuition is alone possible, i.e., that in experience
they must stand under conditions of the necessary unity of appercep­
tion just as in mere intuition they must stand under the formal condi­
tions of space and time; indeed, it is through those conditions that
every cognition is first made possible.

4·
Provisional explanation of the possibility of the
categories as a priori cognitions.

AIII

There is only one experience, in which all perceptions are represented
as in thoroughgoing and lawlike connection, just as there is only one
space and time, in which all forms of appearance and all relationb of
being or non-being take place. If one speaks of different experiences,
they are only so many perceptions insofar as they belong to one and the
same universal experience. The thoroughgoing and synthetic unity of
perceptions is precisely what constitutes the form of experience, and it
is nothing other than the synthetic unity of the appearances in accor­
dance with concepts.
Unity of synthesis in accordance with empirical concepts would be
entirely contingent, and, were it not grounded on a transcendental
ground of unity, it would be possible for a swarm of appearances to fill
up our soul without experience ever being able to arise from it. But in
that case all relation of cognition to objects would also disappear, since
the appearances would lack connection in accordance with universal
and necessary laws, and would thus be intuition without thought, but
never cognition, and would therefore be as good as nothing for us.
The a priori conditions of a possible experience in general are at the
same time conditions of the possibility of the objects of experience,
Now I assert that the categories that have just been adduced are noth­
ing other than the conditions of thinking in a possible experience,
just as space and time contain the conditions of the intuition for the
very same thing. They are therefore also fundamental concepts for
thinking objectsC in general for the appearances, and they therefore
have a priori objective validity, which was just what we really wanted to
know.
However, the possibility, indeed even the necessity of these cate­
gories rests on the relation that the entire sensibility, and with it also all
possible appearances, have to the original apperception, in which every­
thing is necessarily in agreement with the conditions of the thorougha Verha/tnis
b Verhaltnis
Objecte
,

2 34

Section II. Grounds of the possibility of experience <A>

going unity of self-consciousness, i.e., must stand under universal functions of synthesis, namely o f the synthesis in accordance with concepts,
as that in which alone apperception can demonstrate a priori its thor­
oughgoing and necessary identity. Thus the concept of a cause is nothing other than a synthesis (of that which follows in the temporal series
with other appearances) in accordance with concepts; and without
that sort of unity, which has its rule a priori, and which subjects the ap­
pearances to itself, thoroughgoing and universal, hence necessary unity
of consciousness would not be encountered in the manifold perceptions. But these would then belong to no experience, and would conse­
quently be without an object,a and would be nothing but a blind play of
representations, i.e., less than a dream.
All attempts to derive these pure concepts of the understanding from
experience and to ascribe to them a merely empirical origin are therefore entirely vain and futile. I will not mention that, e.g., the concept of
a cause brings the trait of necessity with it, which no experience at all
can yield, for experience teaches us that one appearance customarily follows another, but not that it must necessarily follow that, nor that an inference from a condition to its consequence can be made a priori and
entirely universally. But that empirical rule of association, which one
must assume throughout if one says that everything in the series of oc­
currences stands under rules according to which nothing happens that
is not preceded by something upon which it always follows - on what, I
ask, does this, as a law of nature, rest, and how is this association even
possible? The ground of the possibility of the association of the manifold, insofar as it lies in the object,b is called the affinity of the manifold.
I ask, therefore, how do you make the thoroughgoing affinity of the ap­
pearances (by means of which they stand under constant laws and must
belong under them) comprehensible to yourselves?
On my principles it is easily comprehensible. All possible appearances
belong, as representations, to the whole possible self-consciousness. But
from this, as a transcendental representation, numerical identity is insep­
arable, and certain a priori, because nothing can come into cognition ex­
cept by means of this original apperception. Now since this identity must
necessarily enter into the synthesis of all the manifold of appearances in­
sofar as they are to become empirical cognition, the appearances are thus
subject to a priori conditions with which their synthesis (of apprehension)
must be in thoroughgoing accord. Now, however, the representation of
a universal condition in accordance with which a certain manifold (of
whatever kind) can be posited is called a rule, and, if it must be so
posited, a law. All appearances therefore stand in a thoroughgoing cona Object
b

Objecte
235

A I 12

AII3

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I . Bk. I . Ch. II <A>

A I I4

nection according to necessary laws, and hence in a transcendental
affinity, of which the empirical affinity is the mere consequence.
That nature should direct itself according to our subjective ground of
apperception, indeed in regard to its lawfulness even depend on this,
may well sound quite contradictory and strange. But if one considers
that this nature is nothing in itself but a sum of appearances, hence not
a thing in itself but merely a multitude of representations of the mind,
then one will not be astonished to see that unity on account of which
alone it can be called object a of all possible experience, i.e., nature,
solely in the radical faculty of all our cognition, namely, transcendental
apperception; and for that very reason we can cognize this unity a pri­
ori, hence also as necessary, which we would certainly have to abandon
if it were given in itself independently of the primary sources of our
thinking. For then I would not know whence we should obtain the syn­
thetic propositions of such a universal unity of nature, since in this case
one would have to borrow them from the objects of nature itself. But
since this could happen only empirically, from that nothing but merely
contingent unity could be drawn, which would fall far short of the nec­
essary connection that one has in mind when one speaks of nature.

AII5

Of the Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding
Third Section
On the relationb of the understanding to objects
in general and the
possibility of cognizing these a priori.

A I I6

What we have expounded separately and individually in the previous
section we will now represent as unified and in connection. The possi­
bility of an experience in general and cognition of its objects rest on
three subjective sources of cognition: sense, imagination, and apper­
ception; each of these can be considered empirically, namely in appli­
cation to given appearances, but they are also elements or foundations
a priori that make this empirical use itself possible. Sense represents the
appearances empirically in perception, the imagination in association
(and reproduction), and apperception in the empirical consciousness
of the identity of these reproductive representations with the appear­
ances through which they were given, hence in recognition.
But pure intuition (with regard to it as representation, time, the form
of inner intuition) grounds the totality of perception a priori; the pure
synthesis of the imagination grounds association a priori; and pure apa Object
b

Verhilltnisse
236

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

perception, i.e., the thoroughgoing identity of oneself in all possible
representations, grounds empirical consciousness a priori. 27
Now if we wish to follow the inner ground of this connection of rep­
resentations up to that point in which they must all come together in
order first to obtain unity of cognition for a possible experience, then
we must begin with pure apperception. All intuitions are nothing for us
and do not in the least concern us if they cannot be taken up into con­
sciousness, whether they influence it directly or indirectly, and through
this alone is cognition possible.28 We are conscious a priori of the thor­
oughgoing identity of ourselves with regard to all representations that
can ever belong to our cognition, as a necessary condition of the possibility of all representations (since the latter represent something in me
only insofar as they belong with all the others to one consciousness,
hence they must at least be capable of being connected in it). This principle holds a priori, and can be called the transcendental principleb
of the unity of all the manifold of our representations (thus also in in­
tuition). Now the unity of the manifold in a subject is synthetic; pure
apperception therefore yields a principle of the synthetic unity of the
manifold i n all possible intuition.*
This synthetic unity, however, presupposes a synthesis, or includes it,
and i f the former i s to b e necessary a priori then the latter must also be
* One should attend carefully to this proposition, which is of great importance.
All representations have a necessary relation to a possible empirical con­
sciousness: for if they did not have this, and if it were entirely impossible to become conscious of them, that would be as much as to say that they did not exist
at all. All empirical consciousness, however, has a necessary relation to a tran­
scendental consciousness (preceding all particular experience), namely the con­
sciousness of myself, as original apperception. It is therefore absolutely
necessary that in my cognition all consciousness belong to one consciousness
(of myself). Now here is a synthetic unity of the manifold (of consciousness)
that is cognized a priori, and that yields the ground for synthetic a priori propositions concerning pure thinking in exactly the same way that space and time
yield such propositions concerning the form of mere intuition. The synthetic
proposition that every different empirical consciousness must be combined
into a single self-consciousness is the absolutely first and synthetic principle of
our thinking in general. But it should not go unnoticed that the mere repre­
sentation I in relation to all others (the collective unity of which it makes possible) is the transcendental consciousness. Now it does not matter here
whether this representation be clear (empirical consciousness) or obscure, even
whether it be actual; but the possibility of the logical form of all cognition necessarily rests on the relationship to this apperception as a faculty.
a Princip
b Princip
, Principium
237

A I 17
A I 18
AII7

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. 1. Ch. II <A>

A I I9

A I 20

a synthesis a priori. Thus the transcendental unity of apperception is re­
lated to the pure synthesis of the imagination, as an a priori condition of
the possibility of all composition of the manifold in a cognition. But
only the productive synthesis of the imagination can take place a pri­
ori; for the reproductive synthesis rests on conditions of experience.
The principlea of the necessary unity of the pure (productive) synthesis
of the imagination prior to apperception is thus the ground of the pos­
sibility of all cognition, especially that of experience.29
Now we call the synthesis of the manifold in imagination transcen­
dental if, without distinction of the intuitions, it concerns nothing but
the connection of the manifold a priori, and the unity of this synthesis
is called transcendental if it is represented as necessary a priori in rela­
tion to the original unity of apperception. Now since this latter is the
ground of the possibility of all cognitions, the transcendental unity of
the synthesis of the imagination is the pure form of all possible cogni­
tion, through which, therefore, all objects of possible experience must
be represented a priori.
The unity of apperception in relation to the synthesis of the
imagination is the understanding, and this very same unity, in relation
to the transcendental synthesis of the imagination, is the pure un­
derstanding. In the understanding there are therefore pure a priori
cognitions that contain the necessary unity of the pure synthesis of the
imagination in regard to all possible appearances.30 These, however, are
the categories, i.e., pure concepts of the understanding; consequently
the empirical power of cognition of human beings necessarily contains
an understanding, which is related to all objects of the senses, though
only by means of intuition, and to their synthesis by means of imagi­
nation, under which, therefore, all appearances as data for a possible ex­
perience stand. Now since this relation of appearances to possible
experience is likewise necessary (since without it we could not obtain
any cognition at all through them, and they would thus not concern us
at all), it follows that the pure understanding, by means of the cate­
gories, is a formal and synthetic principleb of all experiences, and that
appearances have a necessary relation to the understanding.
Now we will set the necessary connection of the understanding with
the appearances by means of the categories before our eyes by begin­
ning from beneath, namely with what is empirical. The first thing that
is given to us is appearance, which, if it is combined with consciousness,
is called perception (without the relatione to an at least possible con­
sciousness appearance could never become an object of cognition for us,
Principium
Principium
, Verhiiltnis

a

b

238

j

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

and would therefore be nothing for us, and since it has no objective re­
ality in itself and exists only in cognition it would be nothing at all). But
since every appearance contains a manifold, thus different perceptions
by themselves are encountered dispersed and separate in the mind, a
combination of them, which they cannot have in sense itself, is therefore
necessary. There is thus an active faculty of the synthesis of this mani­
fold in us, which we call imagination, and whose action exercised im­
mediately upon perceptions I call apprehension.* For the imagination is
to bring the manifold of intuition into an image;a it must therefore an­
tecedently take up the impressions into its activity, i.e., apprehend them.
It is, however, clear that even this apprehension of the manifold alone
would bring forth no image and no connection of the impressions were
there not a subjective ground for calling back a perception, from which
the mind has passed on to another, to the succeeding ones, and thus for
exhibiting entire series of perceptions, i.e., a reproductive faculty of
imagination, which is then also merely empirical.
Since, however, if representations reproduced one another without
distinction, just as they fell together, there would in turn be no deter­
minate connection but merely unruly heaps of them, and no cognition
at all would arise; their reproduction must thus have a rule in accor­
dance with which a representation enters into combination in the imag­
ination with one representation rather than with any others. This
subjective and empirical ground of reproduction in accordance with
rules is called the association of representations.
But now if this unity of association did not also have an objective
ground, so that it would be impossible for appearances to be appre­
hended by the imagination otherwise than under the condition of a pos­
sible synthetic unity of this apprehension, then it would also be entirely
contingent whether appearances fit into a connection of human cogni­
tions. For even though we had the faculty for associating perceptions, it
would still remain in itself entirely undetermined and contingent
whether they were also associable; and in case they were not, a multitude of perceptions and even an entire sensibility would be possible in
which much empirical consciousness would be encountered in my
mind, but separated, and without belonging to one consciousness of
* No psychologist has yet thought that the imagination is a necessary ingredient of perception itself. This is so partly because this faculty has been limited
to reproduction, and partly because it has been believed that the senses do not
merely afford us impressions but also put them together, and produce images
of objects, for which without doubt something more than the receptivity of
impressions is required, namely a function of the synthesis of them.
a Bild

239

AI2I

A I22

A I 20

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

AI23

myself, which, however, is impossible. For only because I ascribe all
perceptions to one consciousness (of original apperception) can I say of
all perceptions that I am conscious of them. There must therefore be an
objective ground, i.e., one that can be understood a priori to all empir­
ical laws of the imagination, on which rests the possibility, indeed even
the necessity of a law extending through all appearances, a law, namely,
for regarding them throughout as data of sense that are associable in
themselves and subject to universal laws of a thoroughgoing connection
in reproduction. I call this objective ground of all association of ap­
pearances their affinity. But we can never encounter this anywhere ex­
cept in the principle of the unity of apperception with regard to all
cognitions that are to belong to me. In accordance with this principle
all appearances whatever must come into the mind or be apprehended
in such a way that they are in agreement with the unity of apperception,
which would be impossible without synthetic unity in their connection,
which is thus also objectively necessary.
The objective unity of all (empirical) consciousness in one con­
sciousness (of original apperception) is thus the necessary condition
even of all possible perception, and the affinity of all appearances (near
or remote) is a necessary consequence of a synthesis in the imagination
that is grounded a priori on rules.
The imagination is therefore also a faculty of a synthesis a priori, on
account of which we give it the name of productive imagination, and,
insofar as its aim in regard to all the manifold of appearance is nothing
further than the necessary unity in their synthesis, this can be called the
transcendental function of the imagination. It is therefore certainly
strange, yet from what has been said thus far obvious, that it is only by
means of this transcendental function of the imagination that even the
affinity of appearances, and with it the association and through the lat­
ter finally reproduction in accordance with laws, and consequently ex­
perience itself, become possible; for without them no concepts of
objects at all would converge into an experience.
For the standing and lasting I (of pure apperception) constitutes the
correlate of all of our representations, so far as it is merely possible to
become conscious of them, and all consciousness belongs to an all-em­
bracing pure apperception just as all sensible intuition as representation
belongs to a pure inner intuition, namely that of time. It is this apper­
ception that must be added to the pure imagination in order to make its
function intellectual. For in itself the synthesis of the imagination, al­
though exercised a priori, is nevertheless always sensible, for it combines
the manifold only as it appears in intuition, e.g., the shape of a triangle.
Through the relationa of the manifold to the unity of apperception,
a Verhiiltnis
240

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

however, concepts that belong to the understanding can come about, but
only by means of the imagination in relation to the sensible intuition.
We therefore have a pure imagination, as a fundamental faculty of the
human soul, that grounds all cognition a priori. By its means we bring
into combination the manifold of intuition on the one side and the con­
dition of the necessary unity of apperception on the other. Both ex­
tremes, namely sensibility and understanding, must necessarily be con­
nected by means of this transcendental function of the imagination,
since otherwise the former would to be sure yield appearances but no
objects of an empirical cognition, hence there would be no experience.
Actual experience, which consists in the apprehension, the association
(the reproduction), and finally the recognition of the appearances, contains in the last and highest (of the merely empirical elements of experience) concepts that make possible the formal unity of experience and
with it all objective validity (truth) of empirical cognition. These
grounds of the recognition of the manifold, so far as they concern
merely the form of an experience in general, are now those categories. On them is grounded, therefore, all formal unity in the synthesis of the imagination, and by means of the latter also all of its empirical
use (in recognition, reproduction, association, and apprehension) down
to the appearances, since the latter belong to our consciousness at all
and hence to ourselves only by means of these elements of cognition.
Thus we ourselves bring into the appearances that order and regu­
larity in them that we call nature,JI and moreover we would not be able
to find it there if we, or the nature of our mind, had not originally put
it there. For this unity of nature should be a necessary, i.e., a priori cer­
tain unity of the connection of appearances. But how should we be able
to establish a synthetic unity a priori if subjective grounds of such a
unity were not contained a priori among the original sources of cogni­
tion in our mind, and if these subjective conditions were not at the same
time objectively valid, being the grounds of the possibility of cognizing
any objecta in experience at all?b
a Object

b Question mark added. At this point, the following note is inserted in Kant's copy of the

first edition:
"That the laws of nature really have their origin in the understanding, and are just
as little to be encountered outside it as space and time are, is already proved by the in
any case already acknowledged assertion that we cognize them a priori and as necessary;
for if, on the contrary, they had to be borrowed from outside, we could only cognize
them as contingent. But then what sort of laws are those? No greater and no less than
is necessary in order to bring appearances into a general connection with one con­
sciousness, only in order to cognize objects as such - for that is the form of their intu­
ition and at the same time the condition of their unity in apperception given, and given
a priori. " (E LI, pp. 26-7; 2 3 :26-7)
Erdmann observes that this is the only substantial note in Kant's copy of the first-

241

A 125

A I 26

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

A I2 7

A I 28

We have above explained the understanding in various ways - through
a spontaneity of cognition (in contrast to the receptivity of the sensibil­
ity), through a faculty for thinking, or a faculty of concepts, or also of
judgments - which explanations, if one looks at them properly, come
down to the same thing. Now we can characterize it as the faculty of
rules. This designation is more fruitful, and comes closer to its essence.
Sensibility gives us forms (of intuition), but the understanding gives us
rules. It is always busy poring through the appearances with the aim of
finding some sort of rule in them. Rules, so far as they are objectivea (and
thus necessarily pertain to the cognition of objects) are called laws.
Although we learn many laws through experience, these are only partic­
ular determinations of yet higher laws, the highest of which (under
which all others stand) come from the understanding itself a priori, and
are not borrowed from experience, but rather must provide the appear­
ances with their lawfulness and by that very means make experience pos­
sible. The understanding is thus not merely a faculty for making rules
through the comparison of the appearances; it is itself the legislation for
nature, i.e., without understanding there would not be any nature at all,
i.e. synthetic unity o f the manifold o f appearances in accordance with
rules; for appearances, as such, cannot occur outside us, but exist only in
our sensibility. The latter, however, as the object of cognition in an ex­
perience, with everything it may contain, is possible only in the unity of
apperception. The unity of apperception, however, is the transcendental
ground of the necessary lawfulness of all appearances in an experience.
This very same unity of apperception with regard to a manifold of rep­
resentations (that namely of determining it out of a single one) is the
rule, and the faculty of these rules is the understanding. All appearances
as possible experiences, therefore, lie a priori in the understanding, and
receive their formal possibility from it, just as they lie in the sensibility
as mere intuitions, and are only possible through the latter as far as their
form is concerned.
Thus as exaggerated and contradictory as it may sound to say that the
understanding is itself the source of the laws of nature, and thus of the
formal unity of nature, such an assertion is nevertheless correct and ap­
propriate to the object, namely experience. To be sure, empirical laws,
as such, can by no means derive their origin from the pure understand­
ing, just as the immeasurable manifoldness of the appearances cannot
be adequately conceived through the pure form of sensible intuition.
But all empirical laws are only particular determinations of the pure
edition deduction, from which he infers that Kant in fact very early gave up hope of im­
proving the deduction by minor changes.
a Changed to "Rules, so far as they [represent] existence as necessary . . . " in Kant's copy
of the first edition (E LII, p. 27; 2 3 :46).

2 42

Section III. On the relation of understanding to objects <A>

laws of the understanding, under which and in accordance with whose
norm they are first possible, and the appearances assume a lawful form,
just as, regardless of the variety of their empirical form, all appearances
must nevertheless always be in accord with the pure form of sensibility.
The pure understanding is thus in the categories the law of the syn­
thetic unity of all appearances, and thereby first and originally makes
experience possible as far as its form is concerned. But we did not have
to accomplish more in the transcendental deduction of the categories
than to make comprehensible this relationa of the understanding to sen­
sibility and by means of the latter to all objects of experience, hence to
make comprehensible the objective validity of its pure a priori concepts,
and thereby determine their origin and truth.
Summary representation
of the correctness and unique possibility of this
deduction
of the pure concepts of the understanding.
If the objects with which our cognition has to do were things in them­
selves, then we would not be able to have any a priori concepts of them
at all. For whence should we obtain them? If we take them from the ob­
jectb (without even investigating here how the latter could become
known to us), then our concepts would be merely empirical and not a
priori concepts. If we take them from ourselves, then that which is
merely in us cannot determine the constitution of an object distinct
from our representations, i.e., be a ground why there should be a thing
that corresponds to something we have in our thoughts, and why all
this representation should not instead be empty. But if, on the contrary,
we have to do everywhere only with appearances, then it is not only
possible but also necessary that certain a priori concepts precede the
empirical cognition of objects. For as appearances they constitute an
object that is merely in us, since a mere modification of our sensibility
is not to be encountered outside us at all. Now even this representation - that all these appearances and thus all objects with which we can
occupy ourselves are all in me, i.e., determinations of my identical
self - expresses a thoroughgoing unity of them in one and the same ap­
perception as necessary. The form of all cognition of objects (through
which the manifold is thought as belonging to one object),c however,
also consists in this unity of possible consciousness. Thus the way in
which the manifold of sensible representation (intuition) belongs to a
Verhdltnis
Object
, zu Einem Object
a

b

243

A I 29

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II <A>

A I 30

consciousness precedes all cognition of the object, as its intellectual
form, and itself constitutes an a priori formal cognition of all objects
in general, insofar as they are thought (categories). Their synthesis
through the pure imagination, the unity of all representations in rela­
tion to original apperception, precede all empirical cognition. Pure
concepts of the understanding are therefore possible, indeed necessary
a priori in relation to experience, only because our cognition has to do
with nothing but appearances, whose possibility lies in ourselves,
whose connection and unity (in the representation of an object) is en­
countered merely in us, and thus must precede all experience and first
make it possible as far as its form is concerned. And from this ground,
the only possible one among all, our deduction of the categories has
been conducted.

244
