
Of the Deduction of the Pure Concepts of "
the Understanding
Second Section
Transcendental deduction of the pure
concepts of the understanding a,32

B 129

<§

15·
O n ,ilie possibility of a combination i n general.
The manifold of representations can be given in an intuition that is
merely sensible, i.e., nothing but receptivity, and the form of this intu­
ition can lie a priori in our faculty of representation without being any­
thing other than the way in which the subject is affected. Yet the
combination (conjunctio) of a manifold in general can never come to us
through the senses, and therefore cannot already be contained in the
pure form of sensible intuition; for it is an actb of the spontaneity of the
power of representation, and, since one must call the latter understanding, in distinction from sensibility, all combination, whether we are
conscious of it or not, whether it is a combination of the manifold of intuition or of several concepts, and in the first case either of sensible or
non-sensible intuition, is an action of the understanding, which we
would designate with the general title synthesis in order at the same
time to draw attention to the fact that we can represent nothing as combined in the objectC without having previously combined it ourselves,
and that among all representations combination is the only one that is
not given through objectsd but can be executed only by the subject itself, since it is an acte of its self-activity. One can here easily see that this
action must originally be unitary! and equally valid for all combination,
n In the second edition, the following § 15 through § 27 replace the second and third secb

tions of the "Transcendental Deduction" in the first edition (A 95 to A I 30)'

Actus
, Object
d Objecte
, Actus
f einig; in modern German this is used only in idioms connoting being in agreement or
harmony; perhaps Kant meant to write einzig, i.e., unique.
245

B 1 30

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B I31

and that the dissolution (analysis) that seems to be its opposite, in fact
always presupposes it; for where the understanding has not previously
combined anything, neither can it dissolve anything, for only through
it can something have been given to the power of representation as
combined.
But in addition to the concept of the manifold and of its synthesis, the
concept of combination also carries with it the concept of the unity of
the manifold. Combination is the representation of the synthetic unity
of the manifold. * The representation of this unity cannot, therefore,
arise from the combination; rather, by being added to the representa­
tion of the manifold, it first makes the concept of combination possi­
ble.33 This unity, which precedes all concepts of combination a priori, is
not the former category of unity 1 0); for all categories are grounded
on logical functions in judgments, but in these combination, thus the
unity of given concepts, is already thought. The category therefore al­
ready presupposes combination. We must therefore seek this unity (as
qualitative, § 12) someplace higher, namely in that which itself contains
the ground of the unity of different concepts in judgments, and hence
of the possibility of the understanding, even in its logical use.

(§

§ 1 6.

On the original-synthetic unity of
apperception.
B 132

B 131

The I think must be able to accompany all my representations; for
otherwise something would b e represented in me that could not be
thought at all, which is as much as to say that the representation would
either be impossible or else at least would be nothing for me. That rep­
resentation that can be given prior to all thinking is called intuition.
Thus all manifold of intuition has a necessary relation to the I think in
the same subject in which this manifold is to be encountered. But this
representation is an acta of spontaneity, i.e., it cannot be regarded as
belonging to sensibility. I call it the pure apperception, in order to dis­
tinguish it from the empirical one, or also the original apperception,
since it is that self-consciousness which, because it produces the repre­
sentation I think, which must be able to accompany all others and
* Whether the representations themselves are identical, and whether therefore
one could be thought through the other analytically, does not come into con­
sideration here. The consciousness of the one, as far as the manifold is con­
cerned, is still always to be distinguished from the consciousness of the other,
and it is only the synthesis of this (possible) consciousness that is at issue here.
a Actus
246

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

which in all consciousness is one and the same, cannot be accompanied
by any further representation. I also call its unity the transcendental
unity of self-consciousness in order to designate the possibility of a pri­
ori cognition from it. For the manifold representations that are given in
a certain intuition would not all together be my representations if they
did not all together belong to a self-consciousness; i.e., as my represen­
tations (even if I am not conscious of them as such) they must yet nec­
essarily be in accord with the condition under which alone they can
stand together in a universal self-consciousness, because otherwise they
would not throughout belong to me. From this original combination
much may be inferred.
Namely, this thoroughgoing identity of the apperception of a manifold given in intuition contains a synthesis of the representations, and is
possible only through the consciousness of this synthesis. For the empirical consciousness that accompanies different representations is by
itself dispersed and without relation to the identity of the subject. The
latter rel� tion therefore does not yet come about by my accompanying
each representation with consciousness, but rather by my adding one
representation to the other and being conscious of their synthesis.
Therefore it is only because I can combine a manifold of given repre­
sentations in one consciousness that it is possible for me to represent
the identity of the consciousness in these representations itself, i.e.,
the analytical unity of apperception is only possible under the presup­
position of some synthetic one.*,34 The thought that these representations given in intuition all together belong to me means, accordingly,
the same as that I unite them in a self-consciousness, or at least can
unite them therein, and although it is itself not yet the consciousness of
the synthesis of the representations, it still presupposes the possibility
of the latter, i.e., only because I can comprehend their manifold in a
consciousness do I call them all together my representations; for otherwise I would have as multicolored, diverse a self as I have representa-

* The analytical unity of consciousness pertains to all common concepts as
such, e.g., if I think of red in general, I thereby represent to myself a feature
that (as a mark) can be encountered in anything, or that can be combined with
other representations; therefore only by means of an antecedently conceived
possible synthetic unity can I represent to myself the analytical unity. A rep­
resentation that is to be thought of as common to several must be regarded
as belonging to those that in addition to it also have something different in
themselves; consequently they must antecedently be conceived in synthetic
unity with other (even if only possible representations) before I can think of
the analytical unity of consciousness in it that makes it into a conceptus communis. And thus the synthetic unity of apperception is the highest point to which
one must affix all use of the understanding, even the whole of logic and, after
it, transcendental philosophy; indeed this faculty is the understanding itself.
247

B 133

B 134

B 133

B 1 34

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B 135

:B 136

tions of which I am conscious. Synthetic unity of the manifold of in­
tuitions, as given a priori, is thus the ground of the identity of ap­
perception itself, which precedes a priori all my determinate thinking.
Combination does not lie in the objects, however, and cannot as it were
be borrowed from them through perception and by that means first
taken up into the understanding, but i s rather only an operation o f the
understanding, which is itself nothing further than the faculty of com­
bining a priori and bringing the manifold of given representations under
unity of apperception, which principle is the supreme one in the whole
of human cognition.35
Now this principle of the necessary unity of apperception is, to be
sure, itself identical, thus an analytical proposition, yet it declares as
necessary a synthesis of the manifold given in an intuition, without
which that thoroughgoing identity of self-consciousness could not be
thought. For through the I, as a simple representation, nothing mani­
fold is given; it can only be given in the intuition, which is distinct from
it, and thought through combination in a consciousness. An under­
standing, in which through self-consciousness all of the manifold would
at the same time be given, would intuit; ours can only think and must
seek the intuition in the senses. I am therefore conscious of the identi­
cal self in regard to the manifold of the representations that are given
to me in an intuition because I call them all together my representa­
tions, which constitute one. But that is as much as to say that I am con­
scious a priori of their necessary synthesis, which is called the original
synthetic unity of apperception, under which all representations given
to me stand, but under which they must also be brought by means of a
synthesis.

§

1 7·
The principle of the synthetic unity of apperception
is the supreme principle of all use of the understanding.
The supreme principle of the possibility of all intuition in relation to
sensibility was, according to the Transcendental Aesthetic, that all the
manifold of sensibility stand under the formal conditions of space and
time. The supreme principle of all intuition in relation to the under­
standing is that all the manifold of intuition stand under conditions of
the original synthetic unity of apperception.*,36 All the manifold repre* Space and time and all their parts are intuitions, thus individual representa­
tions along with the manifold that they contain in themselves (see the
Transcendental Aesthetic), thus they are not mere concepts by means of which
the same consciousness is contained in many representations, but rather are
many representations that are contained in one and in the consciousness of it;
they are thus found to be composite, and consequently the unity of con248

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

sentations of intuition stand under the first principle insofar as they are
given to us, and under the second insofar as they must be capable of
being combined in one consciousness; for without that nothing could
b e thought o r cognized through them, since the given representations
would not have in common the acta of apperception, I think, and
thereby would not be grasped together in a self-consciousness.
Understanding is, generally speaking, the faculty of cognitions.
These consist in the determinate relation of given representations to an
object." An object,c however, is that in the concept of which the mani­
fold of a given intuition is united.37 Now, however, all unification of
representations requires unity of consciousness in the synthesis of
them. Consequently the unity of consciousness is that which alone con­
stitutes the relation of representations to an object, thus their objective
validity, and consequently is that which makes them into cognitions and
on which even the possibility of the understanding rests.
The first pure cognition of the understanding, therefore, on which
the whole of the rest of its use is grounded, and that is at the same time
also entirely independent from all conditions of sensible intuition, is the
principle of the original synthetic unity of apperception. Thus the
mere form of outer sensible intuition, space, is not yet cognition at all;
it only gives the manifold of intuition a priori for a possible cognition.
But in order to cognize something in space, e.g., a line, I must draw it,
and thus synthetically bring about a determinate combination of the
given manifold, s o that the unity o f this action i s at the same time the
unity of consciousness (in the concept of a line), and thereby is an objectd (a determinate space) first cognized. The synthetic unity of con­
sciousness is therefore an objective condition of all cognition, not
merely something I myself need in order to cognize an objecte but
rather something under which every intuition must stand in order to
become an objectf for me, since in any other way, and without this
synthesis, the manifold would not be united in one consciousness.
This last proposition is, as we said, itself analytic, although, to be
sure, it makes synthetic unity into the condition of all thinking; for it
says nothing more than that all my representations in any given intu­
ition must stand under the condition under which alone I can ascribe
sciousness, as synthetic and yet as original, is to be found in them. This sin­
gularity of theirs is important in its application (see § 2 5).
a Actus
b Object
Object
d Object
, Object
f Object
C

249

B 137

B 138

Doctrine o f Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B I 39

them to the identical self as my representations, and thus can grasp
them together, as synthetically combined in an apperception, through
the general expression I think.
This principle, however, is not a principle a for every possible under­
standing, but only for one through whose pure apperception in the rep­
resentation I am nothing manifold is given at all. That understanding
through whose self-consciousness the manifold of intuition would at
the same time be given, an understanding through whose representa­
tion the objectsb of this representation would at the same time exist,
would not require a special actC of the synthesis of the manifold for the
unity of consciousness, which the hlunan understanding, which merely
thinks, but does not intuit, does require. But for the human under­
standing it is unavoidably the first principle, so that the human under­
standing cannot even form for itself the least concept of another
possible understanding, either one that would intuit itself or one that,
while possessing a sensible intuition, would possess one of a different
kind than one grounded in space and time.
§ 18.
What objective unity o f self-consciousness is.

B 140

The transcendental unity of apperception is that unity through
which all of the manifold given in an intuition is united in a concept of
the object.d It is called objective on that account, and must be distin­
guished from the subjective unity of consciousness, which is a deter­
mination of inner sense, through which that manifold of intuition is
empirically given for such a combination. Whether I can become
empirically conscious of the manifold as simultaneous or successive
depends on the circumstances, or empirical conditions. Hence the empirical unity of consciousness, through association of the representa­
tions, itself concerns an appearance, and is entirely contingent. The
pure form of intuition in time, on the contrary, merely as intuition in
general, which contains a given manifold, stands under the original
unity of consciousness, solely by means of the necessary relation of the
manifold of intuition to the one I think, thus through the pure syn­
thesis of the understanding, which grounds a priori the empirical syn­
thesis. That unity alone is objectivity valid; the empirical unity of
apperception, which we are not assessing here, and which is also de­
rived only from the former, under given conditions in concreto, has
a Princip
b Objecte
, Actus
d Object

2 50

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

merely subjective validity. One person combines the representation of
a certain word with one thing, another with something else; and the
unity of consciousness in that which is empirical is not, with regard to
that which is given, necessarily and universally valid.
§ 1 9·
The logical form of all judgments consists in the
objective unity of the apperception
of the concepts contained therein.38
I have never been able to satisfy myself with the explanation that the lo­
gicians give of a judgment in general: it is, they say, the representation
of a relationa between two concepts. Without quarreling here about
what is mistaken in this explanation, that in any case it fits only categorical but not hypothetical and disjunctive judgments (which latter
two do not contain a relationb of concepts but of judgments themselves)
(though from this error in logic many troublesome consequences have
arisen),*,39 I remark only that it is not here determined wherein this relatione consists.
If, however, I investigate more closely the relationd of given cogni­
tions in every judgment, and distinguish that relation, as something be­
longing to the understanding, from the relatione in accordance with
laws of the reproductive imagination (which has only subjective valid­
ity), then I find that a judgment is nothing other than the way to bring
given cognitions to the objective unity of apperception.40 That is the
aim of the copula! is in them: to distinguish the objective unity of given
representations from the subjective. For this word designates the relation of the representations to the original apperception and its necessary unity, even if the judgment itself is empirical, hence contingent,
* The widespread doctrine of the four syllogistic figures concerns only the categorical inferences, and, although it is nothing more than an art for surreptitiously producing the illusion of more kinds of inference than that in the first
figure by hiding immediate inferences (consequentiae immediatiae) among the
premises of a pure syllogism, still it would not have achieved any special success by this alone if it had not succeeded in focusing attention exclusively on
categorical judgments as those to which all others have to be related, which
according to § 9, however, is false.
a Verhdltnisses
b

Verhdltnis
, Verhdltnis

Beziehung when he might have used Verhdltnis.
, Verhdltnisse
f Verhdltnisw;jrtchen
d Here Kant uses

251

B 141

B 142

B 141

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. 1. Ch. II. <B>

e.g., "Bodies are heavy." By that, to be sure, I do not mean to say that
these representations necessarily belong to one another in the empir­
ical intuition, but rather that they belong to one another in virtue of
the necessary unity of the apperception in the synthesis of intuitions,
i.e., in accordance with principles a of the objective determination of all
representations insofar as cognition can come from them, which prin­
ciplesb are all derived from the principle of the transcendental unity of
apperception. Only in this way does there arise from this relatione a
judgment, i.e., a relation that is objectively valid, and that is suffi­
ciently distinguished from the relation of these same representations in
which there would be only subjective validity, e.g., in accordance with
laws of association. In accordance with the latter I could only say "If I
carry a body, I feel a pressure of weight," but not "It, the body, is
heavy," which would be to say that these two representations are com­
bined in the object,d i.e., regardless of any difference in the condition of
the subject, and are not merely found together in perception (however
often as that might be repeated).
B I43

§ 20.
All sensible intuitions stand under the
categories, as conditions under which alone
their manifold can come together in one consciousness.
The manifold that is given in a sensible intuition necessarily belongs
under the original synthetic unity of apperception, since through this
alone is the unity of the intuition possible (§ 1 7)' That action of the un­
derstanding, however, through which the manifold of given representa­
tions (whether they be intuitions or concepts) is brought under an
apperception in general, is the logical function of judgments (§ I 9)'
Therefore all manifold, insofar as it is given in onee empirical intuition,
is determined in regard to one of the logical functions for judgment,
by means of which, namely, it is brought to a consciousness in general.
But now the categories are nothing other than these very functions for
judging, insofar as the manifold of a given intuition is determined with
regard to them (§ I 3).41 Thus the manifold in a given intuition also nec­
essarily stands under categories.
Principien
Principien
, Verbaltnisse; the further occurrences of "relation" in this sentence translate further oc­
currences of Verbalmis.
d
Object
, Einer. Not ordinarily capitalized, suggesting the translation "one" instead of merely

n

b

"an."

252

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

§ 21.
Remark.

B I44

A manifold that is contained in an intuition that I call mine is repre­
sented as belonging to the necessary unity of self-consciousness
through the synthesis of the understanding, and this takes place by
means of the category. * This indicates, therefore, that the empirical
consciousness of a given manifold of onea intuition stands under a pure
a priori self-consciousness, just as empirical intuitions stand under :1
pure sensible one, which likewise holds a priori. In the above proposi­
tion, therefore, the beginning of a deduction of the pure concepts of
the understanding has been made, in which, since the categories arise
independently from sensibility merely in the understanding, I must
abstract from the way in which the manifold for an empirical intuition
is given, in order to attend only to the unity that is added to the intu­
ition through the understanding by means of the category. In the sequel
(§ 26) it will be shown from the way in which the empirical intuition is
given in sensibility that its unity can be none other than the one the category prescribes to the manifold of a given intuition in general according to the preceding § 20; thus by the explanation of its b a priori validity
in regard to all objects of our senses the aim of the deduction will first
be fully attained.
In the above proof, however, I still could not abstract from one point,
namely, from the fact that the manifold for intuition must already be
given prior to the synthesis of understanding and independently from
it; how, however, is here left undetermined. For if I wanted to think of
an understanding that itself intuited (as, say, a divine understanding,
which would not represent given objects, but through whose represen­
tation the objects would themselves at the same time be given, or pro­
duced), then the categories would have no significance at all with regard
to such a cognition. They are only rules for an understanding whose en­
tire capacityc consists in thinking, i.e., in the action of bringing the syn­
thesis of the manifold that is given to it in intuition from elsewhere to
the unity of apperception, which therefore cognizes nothing at all by
-

* The ground of proof rests on the represented unity of intuition through
which an object is given, which always includes a synthesis of the manifold
that is given for an intuition, and already contains the relation of the latter to
unity of apperception.
a

b

Einer, again capitalized.
The antecedent is probably "the category" in the preceding clause, but it could also be
"the unity," and thus the translation has been left ambiguous.

, Vermijgen
253

B 145

B 144

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B I46

itself, a but only combines and orders the material for cognition, the in­
tuition, which must be given to it through the object.b But for the pe­
culiarity of our understanding, that it is able to bring about the unity of
apperception a priori only by means of the categories and only through
precisely this kind and number of them, a further ground may be of­
fered just as little as one can be offered for why we have precisely these
and no other functions for judgment or for why space and time are the
sole forms of our possible intuition.
§ 22.

The category has no other use for
the cognition of things than its application
to objects of experience.

B 147

To think of an object and to cognize an object are thus not the same.
For two components belong to cognition: first, the concept, through
which an object is thought at all (the category), and second, the intu­
ition, through which it is given; for if an intuition corresponding to the
concept could not be given at all, then it would be a thought as far as its
form is concerned, but without any object, and by its means no cogni­
tion of anything at all would be possible, since, as far as I would know,
nothing would be given nor could be given to which my thought could
be applied. Now all intuition that is possible for us is sensible (Aes­
thetic), thus for us thinking of an object in general through a pure con­
cept of the understanding can become cognition only insofar as this
concept is related to objects of the senses. Sensible intuition is either
pure intuition (space and time) or empirical intuition of that which,
through sensation, is immediately represented as real in space and time.
Through determination of the former we can acquire a priori cognitions
of objects (in mathematics), but only as far as their form is concerned,
as appearances; whether there can be things that must be intuited in this
form is still left unsettled. Consequently all mathematical concepts are
not by themselves cognitions, except insofar as one presupposes that
there are things that can be presented to us only in accordance with the
form of that pure sensible intuition. Things in space and time, how­
ever, are only given insofar as they are perceptions (representations ac­
companied with sensation), hence through empirical representation.
The pure concepts of the understanding, consequently, even if they are
applied to a priori intuitions (as in mathematics), provide cognition only
insofar as these a priori intuitions, and by means of them also the con­
cepts of the understanding, can be applied to empirical intuitions. Cona

b

for sich
Object
2 54

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

sequently the categories do not afford us cognition of things by means
of intuition except through their possible application to empirical in­
tuition, i.e., they serve only for the possibility of empirical cognition.
This, however, is called experience. The categories consequently have
no other use for the cognition of things except insofar as these are taken
as objects of possible experience.

The above proposition is of the greatest importance, for it determines
the boundaries of the use of the pure concepts of the understanding in
regard to objects, just as the Transcendental Aesthetic determined the
boundaries of the use of the pure form of our sensible intuition. Space
and time are valid, as conditions of the possibility of how objects can be
given to us, no further than for objects of the senses, hence only for ex­
perience. Beyond these boundaries they do not represent anything at
all, for they are only in the senses and outside of them have no reality.
The pure concepts of the understanding are free from this limitation
and extend to objects of intuition in general, whether the latter be similar to our own or not, as long as it is sensible and not intellectual. But
this further extension of concepts beyond our sensible intuition does
not get us anywhere. For they are then merely empty concepts of objects,a through which we cannot even judge whether the latter are possible or not - mere forms of thought without objective reality - since
we have available no intuition to which the synthetic unity of apper­
ception, which they alone contain, could be applied, and that could thus
determine an object. Our sensible and empirical intuition alone can
provide them with sense and significance.
Thus if one assumes an objectb of a non-sensible intuition as given,
one can certainly represent it through all of the predicates that already
lie in the presupposition that nothing belonging to sensible intuition
pertains to it: thus it is not extended, or in space, that its duration is
not a time, that no alteration (sequence of determinations in time) is to
be encountered in it, etc. But it is not yet a genuine cognition ifI merely
indicate what the intuition of the object' is not, without being able to
say what is then contained in it; for then I have not represented the pos­
sibility of an objectd for my pure concept of the understanding at all,
since I cannot give any intuition that would correspond to it, but could
only say that ours is not valid for it. But what is most important here is
that not even a single category could be applied to such a thing, e.g., the
a Objecten
b Object
, Object
d Objects
255

B 148

B 149

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

concept of a substance, i.e., that of something that could exist as a sub­
ject but never as a mere predicate; for I would not even know whether
there could be anything that corresponded to this determination of
thought if empirical intuition did not give me the case for its applica­
tion. But more of this in the sequel.

B I50

B 151

§ 2 4·
On the application of the categories to objects
of the senses in general.
The pure concepts of the understanding are related through the mere
understanding to objects of intuition in general, without it being deter­
mined whether this intuition is our own or some other but still sensible
one, but they are on this account mere forms of thought, through
which no determinate object is yet cognized. The synthesis or combi­
nation of the manifold in them was related merely to the unity of ap­
perception, and was thereby the ground of the possibility of cognition
a priori insofar as it rests on the understanding, and was therefore not
only transcendental but also merely purely intellectual. But since in us
a certain form of sensible intuition a priori is fundamental, which rests
on the receptivity of the capacity for representation (sensibility), the
understanding, as spontaneity, can determine the manifold of given rep­
resentations in accord with the synthetic unity of apperception, and
thus think a priori synthetic unity of the apperception of the manifold
of sensible intuition, as the condition under which all objects of our
(human) intuition must necessarily stand, through which then the cate­
gories, as mere forms of thought, acquire objective reality, i.e., application to objects that can b e given to us in intuition, but only as appear­
ances; for of these alone are we capable of intuition a priori.
This synthesis of the manifold of sensible intuition, which is possible
and necessary a priori, can be called figurative (synthesis speciosa), as dis­
tinct from that which would be thought in the mere category in regard
to the manifold of an intuition in general, and which is called combina­
tion of the understanding (synthesis intellectualis); both are transcenden­
tal, not merely because they themselves proceed a priori but also because
they ground the possibility of other cognition a priori.
Yet the figurative synthesis, if it pertains merely to the original syn­
thetic unity of apperception, i.e., this transcendental unity, which is
thought in the categories, must be called, as distinct from the merely in­
tellectual combination, the transcendental synthesis of the imagina­
tion. Imaginationa is the faculty for representing an object even with­
out its presence in intuition. Now since all of our intuition is sensible,
a Here Kant uses both large type and spacing for extra emphasis.

256

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

the imagination, on account of the subjective condition under which
alone it can give a corresponding intuition to the concepts of under­
standing, belongs to sensibility; but insofar as its synthesis is still an exercise of spontaneity, which is determining and not, like sense, merely
determinable, and can thus determine the form of sense a priori in accordance with the unity o f apperception, the imagination i s t o this extent a faculty for determining the sensibility a priori, and its synthesis of
intuitions, in accordance with the categories, must be the transcendental synthesis of the imagination, which is an effect of the under­
standing on sensibility and its first application (and at the same time
the ground of all others) to objects of the intuition that is possible for
us. As figurative, it is distinct from the intellectual synthesis without
any imagination merely through the understanding. Now insofar as the
imagination is spontaneity, I also occasionally call it the productive
imagination, and thereby distinguish it from the reproductive imagination, whose synthesis is subject solely to empirical laws, namely those
of association, and that therefore contributes nothing to the explanation
of the possibility of cognition a priori, and on that account belongs not
in transcendental philosophy but in psychology.

B 152

* * *

Here is now the place to make intelligible the paradox that must have
struck everyone in the exposition of the form of inner sense (§ 6):
namely how this presents even ourselves to consciousness only as we
appear to ourselves, not as we are in ourselves, since we intuit ourselves
only a s we are internally affected, which seems to b e contradictory,
since we would have to relate to ourselves passively; for this reason it is
customary in the systems of psychology to treat inner sense as the
same as the faculty of apperception (which we carefully distinguish)Y
That which determines the inner sense is the understanding and its
original faculty of combining the manifold of intuition, i.e., of bring­
ing it under an apperception (as that on which its very possibility rests).
Now since in us humans the understanding is not itself a faculty of in­
tuitions, and even if these were given in sensibility cannot take them
up into itself, in order as it were to combine the manifold of its own
intuition, thus its synthesis, considered in itselfa alone, is nothing other
than the unity of the action of which it is conscious as such even with­
out sensibility, but through which it is capable of itself determining
sensibility internally with regard to the manifold that may be given to
it in accordance with the form of its intuition. Under the designation
of a transcendental synthesis of the imagination, it therefore exera for sich

257

B 153

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

B 1 54

B ISS

cises that action on the passive subject, whose faculty it is, about
which we rightly say that the inner sense is thereby affected. Apper­
ception and its synthetic unity is so far from being the same as the
inner sense that the former, rather, as the source of all combination,
applies to all sensible intuition of objects a in general, to the manifold
of intuitions in general, under the name of the categories; inner
sense, on the contrary, contains the mere form of intuition, but with­
out combination of the manifold in it, and thus it does not yet contain
any determinate intuition at all, which is possible only through the
consciousness of the determination of the manifold through the tran­
scendental action of the imagination (synthetic influence of the un­
derstanding on the inner sense), which I have named the figurative
synthesis.
We also always perceive this in ourselves. We cannot think of a line
without drawing it in thought, we cannot think of a circle without de­
scribing it, we cannot represent the three dimensions of space at all
without placing three lines perpendicular to each other at the same
point, and we cannot even represent time without, in drawing a
straight line (which is to be the external figurative representation of
time), attending merely to the action of the synthesis of the manifold
through which we successively determine the inner sense, and thereby
attending to the succession of this determination in inner sense.
Motion, as action of the subject (not as determination of an object),*,b
consequently the synthesis of the manifold in space, if we abstract from
this manifold in space and attend solely to the action in accordance with
which we determine the form of inner sense, first produces the con­
cept of succession at all. The understanding therefore does not find
some sort of combination of the manifold already in inner sense, but
produces it, by affecting inner sense. But how the I that I think is to
differ from the I that intuits itself (for I can represent other kinds of in­
tuition as at least possible) and yet be identical with the latter as the
same subject, how therefore I can say that I as intelligence and think-

* Motion of an object' in space does not belong in a pure science, thus also not
in geometry; for that something is movable cannot be cognized a priori but
only through experience. But motion, as description of a space, is a pure acrt
of the successive synthesis of the manifold in outer intuition in general
through productive imagination, and belongs not only to geometry but even
to transcendental philosophy.
Objecte
Objects
, Object
d Actus

n

b

258

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

ing subject cognize my self as an objecta that is thought, insofar as I am
also given to myself in intuition, only, like other phenomena, not as I
am for the understanding but rather as I appear to myself, this is no
more and no less difficult than how I can be an objectb for myself in
general and indeed one of intuition and inner perceptions. But that it
really must b e s o can b e clearly shown, i f one lets space count a s a mere
pure form of the appearances of outer sense, from the fact that time, although is not itself an object of outer intuition at all, cannot be made
representable to us except under the image of a line, insofar as we draw
it, without which sort of presentation we could not know the unity of
its measure at all, or likewise from the fact that we must always derive
the determination of the length of time or also of the positions in time
for all inner perceptions from that which presents external things to us
as alterable; hence we must order the determinations of inner sense as
appearances in time in just the same way as we order those of outer
sense in space; hence if we admit about the latter that we cognize objectsC by their means only insofar as we are externally affected, then we
must also concede that through inner sense we intuit ourselves only as
we are internally affected by our selves, i.e., as far as inner intuition is
concerned we cognize our own subject only as appearance but not in ac­
cordance with what it is in itself.*A3
§ 25·

B 156

B I57

I n the transcendental synthesis of the manifold of representations in
general, on the contrary, hence in the synthetic original unity of apper­
ception, I am conscious of myself not as I appear to myself, nor as I am
in myself, but only that I am. This representation is a thinking, not
an intuiting. Now since for the cognition of ourselves, in addition to
the action of thinking that brings the manifold of every possible intuition to the unity of apperception, a determinate sort of intuition,
through which this manifold is given, is also required, my own existence
* I do not see how one can find so many difficulties in the fact that inner sense
is affected by ourselves. Every actd of attention can give us an example of this.
In such acts the understanding always determines the inner sense, in accordance with the combination that it thinks, to the inner intuition that corresponds to the manifold in the synthesis of the understanding. How much the
mind is commonly affected by this means, everyone will be able to perceive in
himself.
a Object
b

Object
, Objecte
d Actus
2 59

B 156
B 157

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>
B 1 58

B 159

B 157

B 1 58

is not indeed appearance (let alone mere illusion), but the determination of my existence*>44 can only occur in correspondence with the form
of inner sense, according to the particular way in which the manifold
that I combine is given in inner intuition, and I therefore have no cog­
nition of myself as I am, but only as I appear to myself. The con­
sciousness of oneself is therefore far from being a cognition of oneself,
regardless of all the categories that constitute the thinking of an objeCt"
in general through combination of the manifold in an apperception.
Just as for the cognition of an objectb distinct from me I also need an
intuition in addition to the thinking of an objectC in general (in the cat­
egory), through which I determine that general concept, so for the cog­
nition of myself I also need in addition to the consciousness, or in
addition to that which I think myself, an intuition of the manifold in
me, through which I determine this thought; and I exist as an intelli­
gence that is merely conscious of its faculty for combination but which,
in regard to the manifold that it is to combine, is subject to a limiting
condition that it calls inner sense, which can make that combination in­
tuitable only in accordance with temporal relationsd that lie entirely
outside of the concepts of the understanding proper, and that can there­
fore still cognize itself merely as it appears to itself with regard to an in­
tuition (which is not intellectual and capable of being given through the
understanding itself), not as it would cognize itself if its intuition were
intellectual.
* The I think expresses the act" of determining m y existence. The existence is
thereby already given, but the way in which I am to determine it, i.e., the man­
ifold that I am to posit in myself as belonging to it, is not yet thereby given.
For that self-intuition is required, which is grounded in an a priori given form,
i.e., time, which is sensible and belongs to the receptivity of the determinable.
Now I do not have yet another self-intuition, which would give the deter­
mining in me, of the spontaneity of which alone I am conscious, even before
the actf of determination, in the same way as time gives that which is to be
determined, thus I cannot determine my existence as that of a self-active
being, rather I merely represent the spontaneity of my thought, i.e., of the de­
termining, and my existence always remains only sensibly determinable, i.e.,
determinable as the existence of an appearance. Yet this spontaneity is the rea­
son I call myself an intelligence.
a Object
b Objects

, Object
d

Zeitverhiiltnissen

, Actus
f Actus

260

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>
§ 2 6.
Transcendental deduction of the universally possible
use of the pure
concepts of the understanding in experience.

In the metaphysical deduction45 the origin of the a priori categories in
general was established through their complete coincidence with the
universal logical functions of thinking, in the transcendental deduction, however, their possibility as a priori cognitions of objects of an intuition in general was exhibited (§§ 20, 2 I). Now the possibility of
cognizing a priori through categories whatever objects may come before our senses, not as far as the form of their intuition but rather as
far as the laws of their combination are concerned, thus the possibility
of as it were prescribing the law to nature and even making the latter
possible, is to be explained. For if the categories did not serve in this
way, it would not become clear why everything that may ever come before our senses must stand under the laws that arise a priori from the un­
derstanding alone.
First of all I remark that by the synthesis of apprehension I under­
stand the composition of the manifold in an empirical intuition,
through which perception, i.e., empirical consciousness of it (as ap­
pearance), becomes possible.
We have forms of outer as well as inner sensible intuition a priori in
the representations of space and time, and the synthesis of the appre­
hension of the manifold of appearance must always be in agreement
with the latter, since it can only occur in accordance with this form. But
space and time are represent.ed a priori not merely as forms of sensible
intuition, but also as intuitions themselves (which contain a manifold),
and thus with the determination of the unity of this manifold in them
(see the Transcendental Aesthetic).*A6 Thus even unity of the synthe* Space, represented a s object (as is really required i n geometry), contains more
than the mere form of intuition, namely the comprehensiona of the manifold
given in accordance with the form of sensibility in an intuitive representation,
so that the form of intuition merely gives the manifold, but the formal intuition gives unity of the representation. In the Aesthetic I ascribed this unity
merely to sensibility, only in order to note that it precedes all concepts,
though to b e sure i t presupposes a synthesis, which does not belong to the
senses but through which all concepts of space and time first become possible.
, For since through it (as the understanding determines the sensibility) space or
time are first given as intuitions, the unity of this a priori intuition belongs to
space and time, and not to the concept of the understanding (§ 2 4) .
•

ZusammenJassung

261

B 1 60

B 161
B 160

B 161

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. 1. Ch. II. <B>

sis of the manifold, outside or within us, hence also a combination
with which everything that is to be represented as determined in space
or time must agree, is already given a priori, along with (not in) these
intuitions, as condition of the synthesis of all apprehension. But this
synthetic unity can be none other than that of the combination of the
manifold of a given intuition in general in an original consciousness,
in agreement with the categories, only applied to our sensible intu­
ition. Consequently all synthesis, through which even perception itself
becomes possible, stands under the categories, and since experience is
cognition through connected perceptions, the categories are conditions
of the possibility of experience, and are thus also valid a priori of all ob­
jects of experience.
* * *

B 162

B 163

B 162

Thus if, e.g., I make the empirical intuition of a house into perception through apprehension of its manifold, my ground is the necessary
unity of space and of outer sensible intuition in general, and I as it were
draw its shape in agreement with this synthetic unity of the manifold in
space. This very same synthetic unity, however, if I abstract from the
form of space, has its seat in the understanding, and is the category of
the synthesis of the homogeneous in an intuition in general, i.e., the
category of quantity,a with which that synthesis of apprehension, i.e.,
the perception, must therefore be in thoroughgoing agreement.*
If (in another example) I perceive the freezing of water, I apprehend
two states (of fluidity and solidity) as ones standing in a relationb of time
to each other. But in time, on which I ground the appearance as inner
intuition, I represent necessary synthetic unity of the manifold, with­
out which that relatione could not be determinate1y given in an intu­
ition (with regard to the temporal sequence). But now this synthetic
unity, as the a priori condition under which I combine the manifold of
an intuition in general, if I abstract from the constant form of my
inner intuition, time, is the category of cause, through which, if ! apply
it to my sensibility, I determine everything that happens in time in
* In such a way it is proved that the synthesis of apprehension, which is em­
pirical, must necessarily be in agreement with the synthesis of apperception,
which is intellectual and contained in the category entirely a priori. It is one
and the same spontaneity that, there under the name of imagination and here
under the name of understanding, brings combination into the manifold of
intuition.
a Grofie
b Relation
, Relation
262

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

general as far as its relation° is concerned. Thus the apprehension in
such an occurrence, hence the occurrence itself, as far as possible per­
ception is concerned, stands under the concept of the relationb of ef­
fects and causes, and so in all other cases.
* * *

Categories are concepts that prescribe laws a priori to appearances,
thus to nature as the sum total of all appearances (natura materialiter
spectata),c and, since they are not derived from nature and do not follow
it as their pattern (for they would otherwise be merely empirical), the
question now arises how it is to be conceived that nature must follow
them, i.e., how they can determine a priori the combination of the man­
ifold of nature without deriving from the latter. Here is the solution to
this riddle.
It is by no means stranger that the laws of appearances in nature must
agree with the understanding and its a priori form, i.e., its faculty of
combining the manifold in general, than that the appearances themselves must agree with the form of sensible intuition a priori. For laws
exist just a little in the appearances, but rather exist only relative to the
subject in which the appearances inhere, insofar as it has understanding,
as appearances do not exist in themselves, but only relative to the same
being, insofar as it has senses. The lawfulness of things in themselves
would necessarily pertain to them even without an understanding that
cognizes them. But appearances are only representations of things that
exist without cognition of what they might be in themselves. As mere
representations, however, they stand under no law of connection at all
except that which the connecting faculty prescribes. Now that which
connects the manifold of sensible intuition is imagination, which depends on understanding for the unity of its intellectual synthesis and on
sensibility for the manifoldness of apprehension. Now since all possible
perception depends on the synthesis of apprehension, but the latter itself, this empirical synthesis, depends on the transcendental one, thus
on the categories, all possible perceptions, hence everything that can
ever reach empirical consciousness, i.e., all appearances of nature, as far
as their combination is concerned,47 stand under the categories, on
which nature (considered merely as nature in general) depends, as the
original ground of its necessary lawfulness (as natura flrmaliter spectata).d The pure faculty of understanding does not suffice, however, to
Relation
b Verhiiltnisses
a

, "Nature regarded materially," i.e., nature in the sense of its material.
d "Nature formally regarded," i.e., nature considered with regard to its form rather than
its matter.

263

B 1 64

B r65

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

prescribe to the appearances through mere categories a priori laws
beyond those on which rests a nature in general, as lawfulness of ap­
pearances in space and time. Particular laws, because they concern em­
pirically determined appearances, cannot be completely derived from
the categories, although they all stand under them. Experience must be
added in order to come to know particular laws at all; but about expe­
rience in general, and about what can be cognized as an object of expe­
rience, only those a priori laws offer instruction.
§ 2 7·
Result of this deduction of the concepts of the understanding.

B 166

B 167

B r 66

We cannot think any object except through categories; we cannot cog­
nize any object that is thought except through intuitions that corre­
spond to those concepts. Now all our intuitions are sensible, and this
cognition, so far as its object is given, is empirical. Empirical cognition,
however, is experience. Consequently no a priori cognition is possible
for us except solely of objects of possible experience.*
But this cognition, which is limited merely to objects of experience,
is not on that account all borrowed from experience; rather, with regard
to the pure intuitions as well as the pure concepts of the understanding,
there are elements of cognition that are to be encountered in us a pri­
ori. Now there are only two ways in which a necessary agreement of
experience with the concepts of its objects can be thought: either the
experience makes these concepts possible or these concepts make the
experience possible. The first is not the case with the categories (nor
with pure sensible intuition); for they are a priori concepts, hence inde­
pendent of experience (the assertion of an empirical origin would be a
sort of generatio aequivoca).a Consequently only the second way remains

* So that one may not prematurely take issue with the worrisome and disad­
vantageous consequences of this proposition, I will only mention that the cat­
egories are not restricted in thinking by the conditions of our sensible
intuition, but have an unbounded field, and only the cognition of objects that
we think, the determination of the object,b requires intuition; in the absence
of the latter, the thought of the object ' can still have its true and useful con­
sequences for the use of the subject's reason, which, however, cannot be ex­
pounded here, for it is not always directed to the determination of the object,
thus to cognition, but rather also to that of the subject and its willing.
a The generation of one sort of thing out of something essentially different, e.g., the sup­
posed generation of flies from rotting meat.

Object
, Object
b

'.

264

Section II. Trans. deduction of pure concepts of understanding <B>

(as it were a system of the epigenesis48 of pure reason): namely that the
categories contain the grounds of the possibility of all experience in
general from the side of the understanding. But more about how they
make experience possible, and which principles of its possibility they
yield in their application to appearances, will be taught in the following
chapter on the transcendental use of the power of judgment.
If someone still wanted to propose a middle way between the only
two, already named ways, namely, that the categories were neither self­
thought a priori first principlesa of our cognition nor drawn from ex­
perience, but were rather subjective predispositions for thinking,
implanted in us along with our existence by our author in such a way
that their use would agree exactly with the laws of nature along which
experience runs (a kind of prefonnation-system49 of pure reason),
then (besides the fact that on such a hypothesis no end can be seen to
how far one might drive the presupposition of predetermined predis­
positions for future judgments) this would be decisive against the supposed middle way: that in such a case the categories would lack the
necessity that is essential to their concept. For, e.g., the concept of
cause, which asserts the necessity of a consequent under a presupposed
condition, would be false if it rested only on a subjective necessity, ar­
bitrarily implanted in us, of combining certain empirical representations according to such a rule of relation.b I would not be able to say
that the effect is combined with the cause in the object:" (i.e., necessarily), but only that I am so constituted that I cannot think of this repre­
sentation otherwise than as so connected; which is precisely what the
skeptic wishes most, for then all of our insight through the supposed
objective validity of our judgments is nothing but sheer illusion, and
there would be no shortage of people who would not concede this subjective necessity (which must be felt) on their own; at least one would
not be able to quarrel with anyone about that which merely depends on
the way in which his subject is organized.

B 1 68

Brief concept of this deduction.
It is the exhibition of the pure concepts of the understanding (and with
them of all theoretical cognition a priori) as principlesd of the possi­
bility of experience, but of the latter as the detennination of appearances in space and time in general - and the latter, finally, from the
a Principien

b Verhii/tnisses
, Objecte
d Principien

265

B 169

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. I. Ch. II. <B>

principlea of the original synthetic unity of apperception, as the form
of the understanding in relation to space and time, as original forms of
sensibility.
* * *

I hold the division into paragraphs to be necessary only this far, because
we have been dealing with the elementary concepts. Now that we will
represent their use, the exposition may proceed in a continuous fashion,
without this division.>
a Princip

266
