
Transcendental Dialectic
First Book
On the concepts ofpure reason.

B 367

A

3II

B 368

However i t may b e with the possibility o f concepts from pure reason,
they are not merely reflected concepts but inferred concepts. Concepts
of the understanding are also thought a priori before experience and on
behalf of it; but they contain nothing beyond the unity of reflection on
appearances, insofar as these appearances are supposed to belong nec­
essarily to a possible empirical consciousness. Through them alone is
cognition, and determination of an object, possible. They also first give
material for inferring, and no a priori concepts of objects precede them,
from which they could be inferred. On the contrary, their objective re­
ality is founded solely on the fact that because they constitute the intel­
lectual form of all experience, it must always be possible to show their
application in experience.
The term "a concept of reason," however, already shows in a provi­
sional way that such a concept will not let itself be limited to experience,
because it deals with a cognition (perhaps the whole of possible experi­
ence or its empirical synthesis) of which the empirical is only one part;
no actual experience is fully sufficient for it, but every experience be­
longs to it. Concepts of reason serve for comprehension, just as con­
cepts of the understanding serve for understanding (of perceptions). If
they contain the unconditioned, then they deal with something under
which all experience belongs, but that is never itself an object of expe­
rience; something to which reason leads through its inferences, and by
which reason estimates and measures the degree of its empirical use,
but that never constitutes a member of the empirical synthesis. If de­
spite this such concepts have objective validity, then they can be called
conceptus ratiocinati a (correctly inferred concepts); but if not, they have
at least been obtained by a surreptitious illusion of inference, and so
might be called conceptus ratiocinantesb (sophistical concepts). Since,
however, this can be made out only in the chapter on dialectical infera

reasoned concepts

b ratiocinated concepts
3 94

Section I. On the ideas in general

ences, we will not take account of it yet, but just as we called the con­
cepts of understanding "categories," we will ascribe a new name to the
concepts of pure reason and call them "transcendental ideas," which
term we now elucidate and justify.

First book of the trans cen dental dialectic
First s ection
On the ideas in general

A312

.

In the great wealth of our languages, the thinking mind nevertheless
often finds itself at a loss for an expression that exactly suits its concept,
and lacking this it is able to make itself rightly intelligible neither to
others nor even to itself. Coining new words is a presumption to legislate in language that rarely succeeds, and before we have recourse to
this dubious means it is advisable to look around in a dead and learned
language to see if an expression occurs in it that is suitable to this concept; and even if the ancient use of this expression has become somewhat unsteady owing to the inattentiveness of its authors, it is better to
fix on the meaning" that is proper to it (even if it is doubtful whether it
always had exactly this sense) than to ruin our enterprise by making
ourselves unintelligible.
For this reason, if there perhaps occurs only one single word for a
certain concept that, in one meaning already introduced, exactly suits
this concept, and if it is of great importance to distinguish it from other
related concepts, then it is advisable not to be prodigal with that word
or use it merely as a synonym or an alternative in place of other words,
but rather to preserve it carefully in its proper meaning; for it may otherwise easily happen that when the expression does not particularly occupy our attention but is lost in a heap of others having very divergent
meaning, the thought which it alone can preserve may get lost as well.
Plato made use of the expression idea in such a way that we can readily see that he understood by it something that not only could never be
borrowed from the senses, but that even goes far beyond the concepts
of the understanding (with which Aristotle occupied himself), since
nothing encountered in experience could ever be congruent to it. I I
Ideas for him are archetypes of things themselves, and not, like the cat­
egories, merely the key to possible experiences. In his opinion they
flowed from the highest reason, through which human reason partakes
in them; our reason, however, now no longer finds itself in its original
state, but must call back with toil the old, now very obscure ideas
through a recollection (which is called philosophy).12 I do not wish to
n

Bedeutung; for the remainder of Book I of the "Dialectic," "meaning" will translate this
word; bedeuten, however, will continue to be translated "signifY."
395

B 369

A3 I 3

B 3 70

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

A3 14

B 371

A3 15

B 3 72

A 3 14 / B 3 7 1

go into any literary investigation here, in order to make out the sense
which the sublime philosopher combined with his word. I note only
that when we compare the thoughts that an author expresses about a
subject, in ordinary speech as well as in writings, it is not at all unusual
to find that we understand him even better than he understood himself,
since he may not have determined his concept sufficiently and hence
sometimes spoke, or even thought, contrary to his own intention.
Plato noted very well that our power of cognition feels a far higher
need than that of merely spelling out appearances according to a synthetic unity in order to be able to read them as experience, and that our
reason naturally exalts itself to cognitions that go much too far for any
object that experience can give ever to be congruent, but that none­
theless have their reality and are by no means merely figments of the
brain.
Plato found his ideas preeminently in everything that is practical,* i.e.
in what rests on freedom, which for its part stands under cognitions that
are a proper product of reason. Whoever would draw the concepts of
virtue from experience, whoever would make what can at best serve as
an example for imperfect illustration into a model for a source of cog­
nition (as many have actually done), would make of virtue an ambigu­
ous non-entity, changeable with time and circumstances, useless for any
sort of rule. On the contrary, we are all aware that when someone is
represented as a model of virtue, we always have the true original in our
own mind alone, with which we compare this alleged model and ac­
cording to which alone we estimate it. But it is this that is the idea of
virtue, in regard to which all possible objects of experience do service as
examples (proofs of the feasibility, to a certain degree, of what the con­
cept of reason requires), but never as archetypes. That no human being
will ever act adequately to what the pure idea of virtue contains does not
prove in the least that there is something chimerical in this thought.
For it is only by means of this idea that any judgment of moral worth
or unworth is possible; and so it necessarily lies at the ground of every
approach to moral perfection, even though the obstacles in human na­
ture, as yet to be determined as to their degree, may hold us at a dis­
tance from it.
* Of course he also extended his concept to speculative cognitions, whenever
they were pure and given wholly a priori, and even to mathematics, even
though mathematical cognitions have their object nowhere except in possible
experience. Now I cannot follow him in this, just as little as I can in the mys­
tical deduction of these ideas or in the exaggerated way in which he hyposta­
tized them, as it were; although the lofty language that served him in this field
is surely quite susceptible of a milder interpretation, and one that accords bet­
ter with the nature of things.
3 96

Section 1. On the ideas in general

The Platonic republic has become proverbial as a supposedly striking example of a dream of perfection that can have its place only in the
idle thinker's brain; and Bruckerl3 finds it ridiculous for the philosopher
to assert that a prince will never govern well unless he participates in
the ideas. But we would do better to pursue this thought further, and (at
those points where the excellent man leaves us without help) to shed
light on it through new endeavors, rather than setting it aside as useless
under the very wretched and harmful pretext of its impracticability. A
constitution providing for the greatest human freedom according to
laws that permit the freedom of each to exist together with that of
others (not one providing for the greatest happiness, since that would
follow of itself) is at least a necessary idea, which one must make the
ground not merely of the primary plan of a state's constitution but of all
the laws too; and in it we must initially abstract from the present obstacles, which may perhaps arise not so much from what is unavoidable in
human nature as rather from neglect of the true ideas in the giving of
laws. For nothing is more harmful or less worthy of a philosopher than
the vulgar appeal to allegedly contrary experience, which would not
have existed at all if institutions had been established at the right time
according to the ideas, instead of frustrating all good intentions by
using crude concepts in place of ideas, just because these concepts were
drawn from experience. The more legislation and government agree
with this idea, the less frequent punishment will become, and hence it
is quite rational to assert (as Plato does) that in perfect institutional
arrangements nothing of the sort would be necessary at all. 14 Even
though this may never come to pass, the idea of this maximum is nev­
ertheless wholly correct when it is set forth as an archetype, in order to
bring the legislative constitution of human beings ever nearer to a possible greatest perfection. For whatever might be the highest degree of
perfection at which humanity must stop, and however great a gulf must
remain between the idea and its execution, no one can or should try to
determine this, just because it is freedom that can go beyond every proposed boundary.
But Plato was right to see clear proofs of an origin in ideas not only
where human reason shows true causality, and where ideas become ef­
ficient causes (of actions and their objects), namely in morality, but also
in regard to nature itself.15 A plant, an animal, the regular arrangement
of the world's structure (presumably thus also the whole order of nature) - these show clearly that they are possible only according to ideas;
although n o individual creature, under the individual conditions o f its
existence, is congruent with the idea of what is most perfect of its
species (as little as a human being is congruent with the idea of humanity that he bears in his soul as the archetype of his actions), nevertheless
these ideas :'-re in the highest understanding individual, unalterable,
3 97

A3 16

B 373

A3 I7

B 3 74

A3 I8

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

B 375

A319

B 3 76

A 320

thoroughly determined, and the original causes of things, and only the
whole its combination in the totality of a world is fully adequate to its
idea. If we abstract from its exaggerated expression, then the philoso­
pher's spiritual flight, which considers the physical copies a in the world
order, and then ascends to their architectonic connection according to
ends, i.e., ideas, is an endeavor that deserves respect and imitation; but
in respect of that which pertains to principles b of morality, legislation
and religion where the ideas first make the experience (of the good) it­
self possible, even if they can never be fully expressed in experience,
perform a wholly unique service, which goes unrecognized precisely be­
cause it is judged according to empirical rules, whose validity as princi­
plese should be cancelled by those very ideas. For when we consider
nature, experience provides us with the rule and is the source of truth;
but with respect to moral laws, experience is (alas!) the mother of illusion, and it is most reprehensible to derive the laws concerning what I
ought to do from what is done, or to want to limit it to that.
But instead of these matters, the prosecution of which in fact makes
up the proper dignity of philosophy, we now concern ourselves with a
labor less spectacular but nevertheless not unrewarding: that of making
the terrain for these majestic moral edifices level and firm enough to be
built upon; for under this ground there are all sorts of passageways,
such as moles might have dug, left over from reason's vain but confident
treasure hunting, that make every building insecure. It is the transcen­
dental use of pure reason, of its principlesd and ideas, whose closer ac­
quaintance we are now obligated to make, in order properly to
determine and evaluate the influence and the worth of pure reason. Yet
before I conclude this provisional introduction, I entreat those who take
philosophy to heart (which means more than is commonly supposed), if
they find themselves convinced by this and the following discussion, to
take care to preserve the expression idea in its original meaning, so that
it will not henceforth fall among the other expressions by which all sorts
of representations are denoted in careless disorder, to the detriment of
science. We are not so lacking in terms properly suited to each species
of representation that we have need for one to encroach on the property of another. Here is their progression:e The genus is representa­
tion in general (repraesentatio). Under it stands the representation with
consciousness (perceptio). A perception! that refers to the subject as a
modification of its state is a sensation (sensatio); an objective percepvon der copeilichen Betrachtung des Physischen
b Principien
, Principien
d Principien
, Stufenleiter
f Perception
a

3 98

Section II. On the transcendental ideas

tion a is a cognition (cogn itio). The latter is either an intuition or a concept (intuitus vel conceptus). The former i s immediately related to the
object and is singular; the latter is mediate, by means of a mark, which
can be common to several things. A concept is either an empirical or a
pure concept, and the pure concept, insofar as it has its origin solely in
the understanding (not in a pure image of sensibility), is called notio.b A
concept made up of notions, which goes beyond the possibility of ex­
perience, is an idea or a concept of reason. Anyone who has become
accustomed to this distinction must find it unbearable to hear a repre­
sentation of the color red called an idea. It is not even to be called a notion (a concept of the understanding).'6

B 377

First book of the transcendental dialectic
Second section
On the transcendental ideas."

A 32 1

The transcendental analytic gave us an example of how the mere logical form of our cognition can contain the origin of pure concepts a priori, which represent objects prior to all experience, or rather which
indicate the synthetic unity that alone makes possible an empirical cognition of objects. The form of judgments (transformed into a concept
of the synthesis of intuitions) brought forth categories that direct all use
of the understanding in experience. In the same way, we can expect that
the form of the syllogisms, if applied to the synthetic unity of intuitions
under the authority of the categories, will contain the origin of special
concepts a priori that we may call pure concepts of reason or transcendental ideas, and they will determine the use of the understanding ac­
cording to principlesd in the whole of an entire experience.
The function of reason in its inferences consisted in the universality
of cognition according to concepts, and the syllogism is itself a judgment determined a priori in the whole domain of its condition. I can
draw the proposition "Caius is mortal" from experience merely through
the understanding. But I seek a concept containing the condition under
which the predicate (the assertion in general) of this judgment is given
(i.e., here, the concept "human"), and after I have subsumed [the predicate] under this condition, taken in its whole domain ("all humans are
a

b

Perception

notion
, In his copy of the first edition, Kant inserted these comments:
"In experience we can [encounter] no concepts of reason, e.g., of the simple, which
cannot exhibit any experience, the [absolutely] unconditioned of every kind.
"The cosmological ideas, to be sure, pertain to objects [Objecte] of the sensible
world, but . . . . " (the end of the manuscript is missing) (E CLII, p. 46; 2 3 : 3 8)

d Principien
3 99

B 37 8

A322

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

B 379

A3 2 3

B 3 80

A 3 24

B 38 1

mortal"), I determine the cognition of my object according to it ("Caius
is mortal").
Accordingly, in the conclusion of a syllogism we restrict a predicate
to a certain object, after we have thought it in the major premise in its
whole domain under a certain condition. This complete magnitude of
the domain, in relation to such a condition, is called universality (uni­
versalitas). In the synthesis of intuition this corresponds to allness (uni­
versitas), or the totality of conditions. So the transcendental concept of
reason is none other than that of the totality of conditions to a given
conditioned thing. Now since the unconditioned alone makes possible
the totality of conditions, and conversely the totality of conditions is al­
ways itself unconditioned, a pure concept of reason in general can be
explained a through the concept of the unconditioned, insofar as it con­
tains a ground of synthesis for what is conditioned. 17
There will be as many concepts of reason as there are species of relationb represented by the understanding by means of the categories; and
so we must seek an unconditioned, first, for the categorical synthesis
in a subject, second for the hypothetical synthesis of the members of a
series, and third for the disjunctive synthesis of the parts in a system. 18
There are, therefore, just as many species of syllogism, and in each
of them prosyllogisms proceed to the unconditioned: one, to a subject
that is no longer a predicate, another to a presupposition that presupposes nothing further, and the third to an aggregate of members of a
division such that nothing further is required for it to complete the di­
vision of a concept. Hence the pure rational concepts of the totality in
a synthesis of conditions are necessary at least as problems of extend­
ing the unity of the understanding, if possible, to the unconditioned,
and they are grounded in the nature of human reason, even if these
transcendental concepts lack a suitable use in concreto and have no other
utility than to point the understanding in the right direction so that it
may be thoroughly consistent with itself when it extends itself to its ut­
tennost extremes.
However, while we are speaking here about the totality of conditions
and the unconditioned, as the common title of all concepts of reason, we
once again run up against an expression with which we cannot dispense
and at the same time cannot safely use because of an ambiguity it has ac­
quired through long misuse. The term absolute is one of the few words
that in its original meaning was suited to one concept that by and large
no other word in the same language precisely suits, and so its loss, or
what is the same thing, its vacillating use, must carry with it the loss of
the concept itself, but this is indeed a concept with which we cannot disa erkliirt
b Verhiiltnis
400

Section II. On the transcendental ideas

pense except at great disadvantage to all transcendental estimations.a
The word absolute is now more often used merely to indicate that
something is valid of a thingb considered in itself and thus internally.
In this meaning, "absolutely possible" would signify what is possible in
itself (internally), which is in fact the least one can say of an object. On
the contrary, however, it is also sometimes used to indicate that some­
thing is valid in every relation (unlimitedly) (e.g., absolute dominion);
and in this meaning absolutely possible would signify what is possible
in all respects in every relation, which is again the most that I can say
about the possibility of a thing. Now sometimes, to be sure, these two
meanings coincide. So, for example, what is internally impossible i s also
impossible in every relation, and hence absolutely impossible. But in
most cases they are infinitely far apart from each other, and so I can by
no means infer that because something is possible in itself it is therefore
also possible in every relation, hence absolutely possible. Indeed, in
what follows I will show about absolute necessity that it by no means depends in all cases on what is internal, and so must not be regarded as signifying the same as what is internal. That whose opposite is internally
impossible, that whose opposite is clearly also impossible in all respects,
is therefore itself absolutely necessary; but I cannot infer conversely that
what is absolutely necessary is something whose opposite is internally
impossible, i.e., that the absolute necessity of a thing is an internal necessity; for this "internal necessity" is in certain cases a wholly empty ex­
pression, with which we cannot connect the least concept; on the
contrary, the concept of the necessity of a thing in every relation (to
everything possible) carries with it very special determinations. Now because the loss of a concept that has great application in speculative phi­
losophy can never be a matter of indifference to the philosopher, I hope
he will also not be indifferent to carefully preserving the determination
and the expression on which the concept depends.
It is in this extended meaning that I will make use of the word absolute, opposing i t t o what i s merely comparative, o r valid i n some particular respect; for the latter is restricted to conditions, while the former
is valid without any restriction.
Now a transcendental concept of reason always goes to the absolute
totality in the synthesis of conditions, and never ends except with the
absolutely unconditioned, i.e., what is unconditioned in every relation.
For pure reason leaves to the understanding everything that relates directly to objects of intuition or rather to their synthesis in imagination.
It reserves for itself only the absolute totality in the use of concepts, and
seeks to carry the synthetic unity, which is thought in the categories, all
a Beurteilungen; in the third edition, this word is in the singular.
b

Sacbe

401

A325

B 382

A 32 6

B 3 83

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

A327

B 3 84

A 328

B 3 85

the way to the absolutely unconditioned. We can therefore call this the
unity of reason in appearances, just as that which the category ex­
presses can be called the unity of understanding. Thus reason relates
itself only to the use of the understanding, not indeed insofar as the lat­
ter contains the ground of possible experience (for the absolute totality
of conditions is not a concept that is usable in an experience, because no
experience is unconditioned), but rather in order to prescribe the di­
rection toward a certain unity of which the understanding has no con­
cept, proceeding to comprehend all the actions of the understanding in
respect of every object into an absolute whole. Hence the objective use
of the pure concepts of reason is always transcendent, while that of the
pure concepts of understanding must by its nature always be imma­
nent, since it is limited solely to possible experience.
By the idea of a necessary concept of reason, I understand one to
which no congruent object can be given in the senses. Thus the pure
concepts of reason we have just examined are transcendental ideas.
They are concepts of pure reason; for they consider all experiential
cognition as determined through an absolute totality of conditions.
They are not arbitrarily invented, but given as problemsa by the nature
of reason itself, and hence they relate necessarily to the entire use of the
understanding. Finally, they are transcendent concepts, and exceed the
bounds of all experience, in which no object adequate to the transcen­
dental idea can ever occur. When we call something an idea, we are say­
ing a great deal about its objectb (as an object of pure understanding),
but just for this reason very little about the subject (i.e., in respect of its
actuality under empirical conditions), since, as the concept of a maxi­
mum, nothing congruent to it can ever be given in concreto. Now because in the merely speculative use of reason the latter is really the
whole aim, and approaching a concept that will, however, never be
reached in execution, is the same as simply lacking that concept, it is
said of a concept of this sort that it is only an idea. Thus we might say
that the absolute whole of appearances is only an idea, since, because
we can never project it in an image, it remains a problem C without any
solution. On the contrary, because in the practical use of understanding it is only a matter of execution according to rules, an idea of prac­
tical reason can always be actually given in concreto, though only in part;
indeed, it is the indispensable condition of every practical use of rea­
son. Its execution is always bounded and defective, but within bounds
that cannot be determined, hence always under the influence of the
concept of an absolute completeness. Accordingly, the practical idea is
aufgegeben
Object
,- Problem
a

b

402

Section II. On the transcendental ideas

always fruitful in the highest degree and unavoidably necessary in re­
spect of actual actions. In it practical reason even has the causality ac­
tually to bring forth what its concept contains; and hence of such
wisdom we cannot likewise say disparagingly: It is only an idea; rather
just because it is the idea of a necessary unity of all possible ends, it
must serve as a rule, the original and at least limiting condition, for
everything practical.
Although we have to say of the transcendental concepts of reason:
They are only ideas, we will by no means regard them as superfluous
and nugatory. For even if no object can be determined through them,
they can still, in a fundamental and unnoticed way, serve the under­
standing as a canon for its extended and self-consistent use, through
which it cognizes no more objects than it would cognize through its
concepts, yet in this cognition it will be guided better and further. Not
to mention the fact that perhaps the ideas make possible a transition
from concepts of nature to the practical, and themselves generate support for the moral ideas and connection with the speculative cognitions
of reason. About all this we must expect to be informed in due course.
But given our present aims, we will set aside the practical ideas, and
hence consider reason only in its speculative use, and in this even more
narrowly, namely only in its transcendental use. Here we must strike
out on the same path as we took above in the deduction of the cate­
gories; that is, we must consider the logical form of rational cognition,
and see whether in this way reason will not perhaps also be a source of
concepts, regarding objectsa in themselves as determined synthetically
a priori in respect of one or another function of reason.
Reason, considered as the faculty of a certain logical form of cognition, is the faculty of inferring, i.e., of judging mediately (through the
subsumption of a condition of a possible judgment under the condition
of something given). The given judgment is the universal rule (major
premise, major). The subsumption of the condition of another possible
judgment under the condition of the rule is the minor premise (minor).
The actual judgment that expresses the assertion of the rule in the subsumed caseb is the conclusion (conclusio). The rule says something universal under a certain condition. Now in a case that comes before us the
condition of the rule obtains. Thus what is valid universally under that
condition is also to be regarded as valid in the case before us (which carries this condition with it). We easily see that reason attains to a cognition through actions of the understanding that constitute a series of
conditions. Thus suppose I arrive at the proposition "All bodies are al­
terable" only by beginning with the more remote cognition (in which
a Objecte

b The fourth edition reads "to the subsumed case."

403

A 3 29

B 3 86

A330

B 3 87

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

A33 1

B 3 88

A 33 2

B 3 89

the concept of a body does not occur, but that contains the condition of
this concept) that "Everything composite is alterable," and go from
this to a closer proposition standing under the condition of the former:
"Bodies are composite"; and then from this finally to a third proposi­
tion, conjoining the more distant cognition ("alterable") with the one
lying before us: "Consequently, bodies are alterable"; then I arrive at a
cognition (a conclusion) through a series of conditions (premises). Now
every series whose exponent (whether that of the categorical or the hy­
pothetical judgment) is given may be continued; hence the very same
action of reason leads to a ratiocinatio prosyllogistica, a which is a series of
inferences, that can be continued to an indeterminate extent either on
the side of the conditions (per prosyllogismos)b or on the side of the con­
ditioned (per episyllogismos).c
But we soon come to be aware that the chain or series of prosyllo­
gisms, i.e., of inferred cognitions on the side of the grounds, or of the
conditions of a given cognition - in other words, the ascending series
of syllogisms - has to be related to the faculty of reason differently from
the descending series, i.e., the progression of reason on the side of
that which is conditioned through episyllogisms. For since in the first
case the cognition (the conclusio) is given only as conditioned, we cannot
reach it by means of reason except at least on the presupposition that all
members of the series are given on the side of the conditions (totality in
the series of premises), because only under this presupposition is the
judgment before us possible a priori; on the contrary, on the side of that
which is conditioned or of the consequences, there is thought only a series that becomes, and that is not already presupposed or given as a
whole, and so only a potential progression. Hence if a cognition is re­
garded as conditioned, reason is necessitated to regard the series of con­
ditions in an ascending line as completed and given in their totality. But
if the very same cognition is at the same time regarded as a condition of
other cognitions that constitute a series of consequences in a descend­
ing line, then reason can be entirely indifferent about how far this pro­
gression stretches a parte posteriori, and whether a totality of these
conditions is even possible at all; for it does not need a series of the
same sort for the conclusion that lies before us, since this conclusion is
already sufficiently determined and secured through its grounds a parte
priori. Now it may or may not be that on the side of the conditions, the
series of premises has a first [member] as the supreme condition, and
hence that it is without bound a parte priori; nevertheless it must still
a "Prosyllogistic reasoning," that is, reasoning through a series of syllogisms to arrive at
a desired conclusion.

b by prosyllogisms
, by episyllogisms

404

Section III. System of transcendental ideas

contain the totality of the condition, assuming that we could never suc­
ceed in grasping it; and the whole series must be unconditionally true if
the conditioned, which is regarded as a consequence arising from it, is
supposed to count as true. This is a demand of reason, which declares
its cognition to be determined a priori and necessary either as it is in it­
self - in which case it needs no grounds - or else - if it is derived - as a
member of a series of grounds that is itself unconditionally true.

The first book of the transcendental dialectic
Third section
The system of the transcendental ideas.
What we have to do with here is not a logical dialectic that abstracts
from every content of cognition and merely discovers false illusion in
the form of syllogisms, but rather a transcendental dialectic, that, fully
a priori, is supposed to contain both the origin of certain cognitions
from pure reason and inferred concepts, whose object cannot be given
empirically at all, and so lies wholly outside the faculty of the pure un­
derstanding. We have gathered from the natural relation that the tran­
scendental use of our cognition must have in its inferences as well as in
its judgments that there will be only three species of dialectical infer­
ences, relating to the three species of inference by which reason can ar­
rive at cognitions from principles;a and that in everything the concern
of reason is to ascend from the conditioned synthesis, to which the un­
derstanding always remains bound, toward the unconditioned, which
the understanding can never reach.
Now what is universal in every relation that our representations can
have is r) the relation to the subject, 2) the relation to objects, b and in­
deed either asC appearances, or as objects of thinking in general. If we
combine this subdivision with the above division, then all the relationd
of representations of which we can make either a concept or an idea are
of three sorts: I ) the relatione to the subject, 2) to the manifold of the
object! in appearance, and 3) to all things in general. '9
Now all pure concepts have to do generally with the synthetic unity
of representations, but concepts of pure reason (transcendental ideas)
have to do with the unconditioned synthetic unity of all conditions in
general. Consequently, all transcendental ideas will be brought under
a

b
C

d

Principien
Objecte
In the first edition: entweder erstlich als, which could be translated "either firstly as," or
"either only as."

Verhdltnis
Verhdltnis
f Object
e

405

B 391
A 3 34

Doctrine o f Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

B 39 2
A335

three classes, of which the first contains the absolute (unconditioned)
unity of the thinking subject, the second the absolute unity of the se­
ries of conditions of appearance, the third the absolute unity of the
condition of all objects of thought in general.
The thinking subject is the object of psychology, the sum total of all
appearances (the world) is the object of cosmology, and the thing that
contains the supreme condition of the possibility of everything that can
be thought (the being of all beings) is the object of theology.zo Thus
pure reason provides the ideas for a transcendental doctrine of the soul
(psychologia rationalis),a a transcendental science of the world (cosmologia
rationalis),b and finally also a transcendental cognition of God (theologia
transcendentalis). c Even so much as the mere sketch of these sciences is
not prescribed by the understanding, even if it is combined with the
highest logical use of reason, i.e., with all the inferences through which
we can think of progressing from an object of the understanding (ap­
pearance) to all other objects, even to the most distant members of the
empirical synthesis; rather, such a project is exclusively a pure and gen­
uine product or problemd of pure reason.
What modi of pure rational concepts stand under these three titles of
transcendental ideas will be finally displayed in the following sections.
They run along the thread of the categories. For pure reason is never
related directly to objects, but instead to concepts of them given by the
understanding. Likewise, it can be made clear only in the complete ex­
ecution how reason, exclusively through the synthetic use of the same
function it employs in the categorical syllogism, must necessarily come
to the concept of the absolute unity of the thinking subject, how
the logical procedure in hypothetical syllogisms e [leads to] the ideas of
the absolutely unconditioned in a series of given conditions, and finally
how the mere form of the disjunctive syllogism necessarily carries with
it the highest rational concept of a being of all beings; a thought which
at first glance appears extremely paradoxical.
No objective deduction of these transcendental ideas is really pos­
sible, such as we could provide for the categories. For just because they
are ideas, they have in fact no relation to any object! that could be given
congruent to them. But we can undertake a subjective introduction t�
a rational psychology
b rational cosmology
C

d

transcendental theology

Problem

, The text here seems garbled. It reads "in hypothetischen Ideen die vom Schlechthinunbedin­
gten . . . . " (in the first edition: " . . . die Idee vom . . . . ". We follow Erdmann in inserting
the word Vernunftschlussen.

f Object
g

Anleitung; Erdmann reads Ableitung (derivation of).
406

Section III. System of transcendental ideas

them from the nature of our reason, and this is to be accomplished in
the present section.
We easily see that pure reason has no other aim than the absolute to­
tality of synthesis on the side of conditions (whether they are condi­
tions of inherence, dependence, or concurrence), and that reason has
nothing to do with absolute completeness from the side of the condi­
tioned. For it needs only the former series in order to presuppose the
whole series of conditions and thereby give it to the understanding a
priori. But once a complete (and unconditioned) given condition exists,
then a concept of reason is no longer needed in respect of the progress
of the series; for the understanding by itself makes every step downwards from the condition to the conditioned. In this way, the transcendental ideas serve only for ascending in the series of conditions to
the unconditioned, i.e., to the principles.a But regarding descent to the
conditioned, there is a very extensive logical use that our reason makes
of the laws of the understanding, but no transcendental use and if we
make ourselves an idea of absolute totality of such a synthesis (of a pro­
gressive one), e.g., an idea of the whole series of all future alterations
in the world, then this is just a thing of thought (an ens rationis),b which
is thought up only arbitrarily, and not presupposed necessarily by reason. For the possibility of something conditioned presupposes the totality of its conditions, but not the totality of its consequences.
Consequently such a concept is not a transcendental idea, which is what
exclusively concerns us here.
Finally we also come to be aware that a certain connection and unity
showing itself among the transcendental ideas tl1emselves and that pure
reason by means of it brings all its cognitions into a system. To progress
from the cognition of oneself (of the soul) to cognition of the world
and, by means of this, to the original being, is so natural that this pro­
gression appears similar to the logical advance of reason from premises
to a conclusion.* Whether there is actually here an affinity of the same
* c<Metaphysics has as the proper end of its investigation only three ideas: God,
freedom, and immortality; so that the second concept, combined with the
first, should lead to the third as a necessary conclusion. Everything else with
which this science is concerned serves merely as a means of attaining these
ideas and their reality. It does not need them for the sake of natural science, but
instead to get beyond nature. The insight into these ideas would make theology, morals, and, through their combination, religion, thus the highest ends
of our existence, dependent solely on the faculty of speculative reason and on
nothing else. In a systematic representation of those ideas, the suggested order,
a Principien

b
C

being of reason
This note was added in the second edition.

407

B 394

A 337

B 3 95
B 3 95

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. II. Book I

kind that grounds the logical and transcendental procedures is one of
the questions we must expect to answer in the course of our investiga­
tion. We have provisionally reached our end already, since we have re­
moved from this ambiguous position the transcendental concepts of
reason, which are usually mixed with other concepts in the theories of
philosophers who do not distinguish them from concepts of the under­
standing, and thereby provided their determinate number, since there
can never be any more of them, and we have been able to represent
them in a systematic connection, through which a special field of pure
reason has been marked out and its limits have been set.
which is a synthetic one, would be the most appropriate; but in working
through them, which must necessarily be done first, the analytic order, which
inverts this one, is more suitable to the end of completing our great project,
proceeding from what experience makes immediately available to us from the
doctrine of the soul, to the doctrine of the world and from there all the way
to the cognition of God.>

408
