
The Transcendental Doctrine of Elements
Second Part
The Transcendental Logic

Introduction
The Idea of a Transcendental Logk
1.

On logic in general.
Our cognition arises from two fundamental sources in the mind, the
first of which is the reception of representations (the receptivity of im­
pressions), the second the faculty for cognizing an object by means of
these representations (spontaneity of concepts); through the former an
object is given to us, through the latter it is thought in relation to that
representation (as a mere determination of the mind). Intuition and
concepts therefore constitute the elements of all our cognition, so that
neither concepts without intuition corresponding to them in some way
nor intuition without concepts cana yield a cognition. Both are either
pure or empirical. Empirical, if sensation (which presupposes the ac­
tual presence of the object) is contained therein; but pure if no sensa­
tion is mixed into the representation. One can call the latter the matter
of sensible cognition. Thus pure intuition contains merely the form
under which something is intuited, and pure concept only the form of
thinking of an object in general. Only pure intuitions or concepts alone
are possible a priori, empirical ones only a posteriori.
If we will call the receptivity of our mind to receive representations
insofar as it is affected in some way sensibility, then on the contrary the
faculty for bringing forth representations itself, or the spontaneity of
cognition, is the understanding. It comes along with our nature that
intuition can never be other than sensible, i.e., that it contains only
the way in which we are affected by objects. The faculty for thinking
of objects of sensible intuition, on the contrary, is the understanding.
Neither of these properties is to be preferred to the other. Without sen­
sibility no object would be given to us, and without understanding none
would be thought. Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions
a The second edition has the plural verb konnen; the first had the singular kann.
193

B 75
A5I

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

B 76
A52

B 77
A 53

without concepts are blind. I It is thus just as necessary to make the
mind's concepts sensible (i.e., to add an object to them in intuition) as
it is to make its intuitions understandable (i.e., to bring them under
concepts). Further, these two faculties or capacities cannot exchange
their functions. The understanding is not capable of intuiting anything,
and the senses are not capable of thinking anything. Only from their
unification can cognition arise. But on this account one must not mix
u p their roles, rather one has great cause to separate them carefully
from each other and distinguish them. Hence we distinguish the science
of the rules of sensibility in general, i.e., aesthetic, from the science of
the rules of understanding in general, i.e., logic.
Now logic in turn can be undertaken with two different aims, either as
the logic of the general or of the particular use of the understanding. The
former contains the absolutely necessary rules of thinking, without which
no use of the understanding takes place, and it therefore concerns these
rules without regard to the difference of the objects to which it may be
directed.2 The logic of the particular use of the understanding contains
the rules for correctly thinking about a certain kind of objects. The for­
mer can be called elementary logic, the latter, however, the organon of
this or that science. In the schools the latter is often stuck before the sci­
ences as their propaedeutic, though in the course of human reason they
are certainly the latest to be reached, once the science is already long
complete, and requires only the final touch for its improvement and per­
fection. For one must already know the objects rather well if one will
offer the rules for how a science of them is to be brought about.
Now general logic is either pure or applied logic. In the former we
abstract from all empirical conditions under which our understanding
is exercised, e.g., from the influence of the senses, from the play of
imagination," the laws of memory, the power of habit, inclination, etc.,
hence also from the sources of prejudice, indeed in general from all
causes from which certain cognitions arise or may be supposed to arise,
because these merely concern the understanding under certain circum­
stances of its application, and experience is required in order to know
these. A general but pure logic therefore has to do with strictly a pri­
ori principles/ and is a canon of the understanding and reason, but
only in regard to what is formal in their use, be the content what it may
(empirical or transcendental). A general logic, however, is then called
applied if it is directed to the rules of the use of the understanding
under the subjective empirical conditions that psychology teaches us. It
therefore has empirical principles/ although it is to be sure general ina Einbildung
b Principien
Principien
C

1 94

Introduction

sofar as it concerns the use of the understanding without regard to the
difference of objects. On this account it is also neither a canon of the
understanding in general nor an organon of particular sciences, but
merely a cathartic of the common understanding.
In general logic the part that is to constitute the pure doctrine of reason must therefore be entirely separated from that which constitutes
applied (though still general) logic. The former alone is properly science, although brief and dry, as the scholastically correct presentation
of a doctrine of the elements of the understanding requires. In this
therefore logicians must always have two rules in view.
I ) As general logic it abstracts from all contents of the cognition of
the understanding and of the difference of its objects, and has to do with
nothing but the mere form of thinking.
2) As pure logic it has no empirical principles,a thus it draws nothing
from psychology (as one has occasionally been persuaded), which there­
fore has no influence at all on the canon of the understanding. It is a
proven doctrine, and everything in it must be completely a priori.
What I call applied logic (in opposition to the common signification
of this word, according to which it ought to contain certain exercises to
which pure logic gives the rule) is thus a representation of the under­
standing and the rules of its necessary use in concreto, namely under the
contingent conditions of the subject, which can hinder or promote this
use, and which can all be given only empirically. It deals with attention,
its hindrance and consequences, the cause of error, the condition of
doubt, of reservation, of conviction, etc., and general and pure logic is
related to it as pure morality, which contains merely the necessary moral
laws of a free will in general, is related to the doctrine of virtue proper,
which assesses these laws under the hindrances of the feelings, inclinations, and passions to which human beings are more or less subject, and
which can never yield a true and proven science, since it requires empirical and psychological principlesb just as much as that applied logic does.
II.

On transcendental logic.
General logic abstracts, as we have shown, from all content of cogni­
tion, i.e. from any relation C of it to the object,d and considers only the
a Principien
b Principien
, Beziehung. The contrast between this term and the following use of Verhdltnis (p. 1 96,

d

note a) shows that Kant continues to use the former to connote a relation between sub­
ject and object and the latter among objects, thuugh in this case objects of thought
rather than sensibility. Further, unnoted instances of "relation" translate Beziehung.

Object
195

B 78

A 54

B 79

A55

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

B 80

A56

B 81

A 57

logical form in the relationa of cognitions to one another, i.e., the form
of thinking in general. But now since there are pure as well as empiri­
cal intuitions (as the transcendental aesthetic proved), a distinction between pure and empirical thinking of objects could also well be found.
In this case there would be a logic in which one did not abstract from
all content of cognition; for that logic that contained merely the rules
of the pure thinking of an object would exclude all those cognitions that
were of empirical content. It would therefore concern the origin of our
cognitions of objects insofar as that cannot be ascribed to the objects;
while general logic, on the contrary, has nothing to do with this origin
of cognition, but rather considers representations, whether they are
originally given a priori in ourselves or only empirically, merely in re­
spect of the laws according to which the understanding brings them
into relationb to one another when it thinks, and therefore it deals only
with the form of the understanding, which can be given to the repre­
sentations wherever they may have originated.
And here I make a remark the import of which extends to all of the
following considerations, and that we must keep well in view, namely
that not every a priori cognition must be called transcendental, but only
that by means ofwhich we cognize that and how certain representations
(intuitions or concepts) are applied entirely a priori, or are possible (i.e.,
the possibility o f cognition or its use a priori). Hence neither space nor
any geometrical determination of it a priori is a transcendental repre­
sentation, but only the cognition that these representations are not of
empirical origin at all and the possibility that they can' nevertheless be
related a priori to objects of experience can be called transcendental.
Likewise the use of space about all objects in general would also be
transcendental; but if it is restricted solely to objects of the senses, then
it is called empirical. The difference between the transcendental and
the empirical therefore belongs only to the critique of cognitions and
does not concern their relation to their object.
In the expectation, therefore, that there can perhaps be concepts that
may be related to objects a priori, not as pure or sensible intuitions but
rather merely as acts of pure thinking, that are thus concepts but of nei­
ther empirical nor aesthetic origin, we provisionally formulate the idea
of a science of pure understanding and of the pure cognition of reason,
by means of which we think objects completely a priori. Such a science,
which would determine the origin, the domain, and the objective valid­
ity of such cognitions, would have to be called transcendental logic,
since it has to do merely with the laws of the understanding and reason,
a

Verbaltnisse

b Verbaltnis

, Following Erdmann, reading kiinnen instead of kiinne.

1 96

Introduction

but solely insofar as they are related to objects a priori and not, as in the
case of general logic, to empirical as well as pure cognitions of reason
without distinction.

B 82

III.
On the division of general logic
into analytic and dialectic.
The old and famous question with which the logicians were to be dri­
ven into a corner and brought to such a pass that they must either fall
into a miserable circlea or else confess their ignorance, hence the vanity of their entire art, is this: What is truth? The nominal definition of
truth, namely that it is the agreement of cognition with its object, is
here granted and presupposed; but one demands to know what is the
general and certain criterion of the truth of any cognition.
It is already a great and necessary proof of cleverness or insight to
know what one should reasonably ask. For if the question is absurd in
itself and demands unnecessary answers, then, besides the embarrassment of the one who proposes it, it also has the disadvantage of mis­
leading the incautious listener into absurd answers, and presenting the
ridiculous sight (as the ancients said) of one person milking a billy-goat
while the other holds a sieve underneath.3
If truth consists in the agreement of a cognition with its object, then
this object must thereby be distinguished from others; for a cognition
is false if it does not agree with the object to which it is related even if
it contains something that could well be valid of other objects. Now a
general criterion of truth would be that which was valid of all cognitions
without any distinction among their objects. But it is clear that since
with such a criterion one abstracts from all content of cognition (relation to its object), b yet truth concerns precisely this content, it would be
completely impossible and absurd to ask for a mark of the truth of this
content of cognition, and thus it is clear that a sufficient and yet at the
same time general sign of truth cannot possibly be provided. Since
above we have called the content of a cognition its matter, one must
therefore say that no general sign of the truth of the matter of cognition can be demanded, because it is self-contradictory.
But concerning the mere form of cognition (setting aside all content),
it is equally clear that a logic, so far as it expounds the general and necessary rules of understanding, must present criteria of truth in these
very rules. For that which contradicts these is false, since the under­
standing thereby contradicts its general rules of thinking and thus conn In the second edition, Dialexis; in the first, Dialele, i.e. reasoning in a circle.
b

Object

1 97

A5 8

B 83

A 59

B 84

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

A60

B 8S

A6r

B 86

tradicts itself. But these criteria concern only the form of truth, i.e., of
thinking in general, and are to that extent entirely correct but not suf­
ficient. For although a cognition may be in complete accord with logi­
cal form, i.e., not contradict itself, yet it can still always contradict the
object. The merely logical criterion of truth, namely the agreement of
a cognition with the general and formal laws of understanding and rea­
son, is therefore certainly the conditio sine qua non and thus the negative
condition of all truth; further, however, logic cannot go, and the error
that concerns not form but content cannot be discovered by any touch­
stone of logic.4
General logic analyzes the entire formal business of the understand­
ing and reason into its elements, and presents these as principlesa of all
logical assessmentb of our cognition. This part of logic can therefore be
called an analytic, and is on that very account at least the negative
touchstone of truth, since one must before all else examine and evalu­
ate by means of these rules the form of all cognition before investigating its content in order to find out whether with regard to the object it
contains positive truth. But since the mere form of cognition, however
well it may agree with logical laws, is far from sufficing to constitute the
material (objective) truth of the cognition, nobody can dare to judge of
objects and to assert anything about them merely with logic without
having drawn on antecedently well-founded information about them
from outside oflogic, in order subsequently merely to investigate its use
and connection in a coherent whole according to logical laws, or, bet­
ter, solely to examine them according to such laws. Nevertheless there
is something so seductive in the possession of an apparent art for giving
all of our cognitions the form of understanding, even though with regard to their content one may yet be very empty and poor, that this gen­
eral logic, which is merely a canon for judging,c has been used as if it
were an organon for the actual production of at least the semblance of
objective assertions, and thus in fact it has thereby been misused. Now
general logic, as a putative organon, is called dialectic.
As different as the significance of the employment of this designation
of a science or art among the ancients may have been, one can still infer
from their actual use of it that among them it was nothing other than
the logic of illusion a sophistical art for giving to its ignorance, in­
deed even to its intentional tricks, the air of truth, by imitating the
method of thoroughness, which logic prescribes in general, and using
its topics for the embellishment of every empty pretension. Now one
can take it as a certain and useful warning that general logic, consid-

N

Principien

b Beurtheilung

, Beurtheilung
1 98

Introduction

ered as an organon, is always a logic of illusion, i.e., is dialectical. For
since it teaches us nothing at all about the content of cognition, but
only the formal conditions of agreement with the understanding, which
are entirely indifferent with regard to the objects, the effrontery of
using it as a tool (organon) for an expansion and extension of its infor­
mation,a or at least the pretension of so doing, comes down to nothing
but idle chatter, asserting or impeaching whatever one wants with some
plausibility.
Such instruction by no means befits the dignity of philosophy. For
this reason it would be better to take this designation of "dialectic" as a
critique of dialectical illusion, which is counted as part of logic, and
in such a way we would here have it be understood.
Tv.

On the division of transcendental logic into
the transcendental analytic and dialectic.
In a transcendental logic we isolate the understanding (as we did above
with sensibility in the transcendental aesthetic), and elevate from our
cognition merely the part of our thought that has its origin solely in the
understanding. The use of this pure cognition, however, depends on
this as its condition: that objects are given to us in intuition, to which it
can be applied. For without intuition all of our cognition would lack ob­
jects,b and therefore remain completely empty. The part of transcen­
dental logic, therefore, that expounds the elements of the pure
cognition of the understanding and the principlesc without which no
object can be thought at all, is the transcendental analytic, and at the
same time a logic of truth. For no cognition can contradict it without at
the same time losing all content, i.e., all relation to any object,d hence
all truth. But because it is very enticing and seductive to make use of
these pure cognitions of the understanding and principles by them­
selves, and even beyond all bounds of experience, which however itself
alone can give us the matter (objects)' to which those pure concepts of
the understanding can be applied, the understanding falls into the danger of making a material use of the merely formal principles! of pure
understanding through empty sophistries, and of judging without dis­
tinction about objects that are not given to us, which perhaps indeed
a Kenntnisse
b Objecten
, Principien
d Object
, Objecte
f Principien

199

A62

B 87

A63

B 88

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Transcendental Logic

A 64

could not be given to us in any way. Since it should properly be only a
canon for the assessment of empirical use, it is misused if one lets it
count as the organon of a general and unrestricted use, and dares to
synthetically judge, assert, and decide about objects in general with the
pure understanding alone. The use of the pure understanding would in
this case therefore be dialectical. The second part of the transcendental
logic must therefore be a critique of this dialectical illusion, and is called
transcendental dialectic, not as an art of dogmatically arousing such il­
lusion (an unfortunately highly prevalent art among the manifold works
of metaphysical jugglery), but rather as a critique of the understanding
and reason in regard to their hyperphysical use, in order to uncover the
false illusion of their groundless pretensions and to reduce their claims
to invention and amplification, putatively to be attained through tran­
scendental principles, to the mere assessment and evaluation of the pure
understanding, guarding it against sophistical tricks.

200
