
Transcendental Doctrine of the
Power ofJudgment
(or Analytic of Principles)
Second Chapter
System of aU principles ofpure
understanding

B 188

A 149

In the previous chapter we have considered the transcendental power
of judgment only in accordance with the general conditions under
which alone it is authorized to use the pure concepts of the under­
standing for synthetic judgments. Now our task is to exhibit in sys­
tematic combination the judgments that the understanding actually
brings about a priori subject to this critical warning, for which our table
of the categories must doubtless give us natural and secure guidance.
For it is precisely these whose relation to possible experience must
constitute all pure cognition of the understanding a priori, and whose
relationa to sensibility in general will, on that very account, display all
transcendental principles of the use of the understanding completely
and in a system.
A priori principles bear this name not merely because they contain in
themselves the grounds of other judgments, but also because they are
not themselves grounded in higher and more general cognitions. Yet
this property does not elevate them beyond all proof. For although this
could not be carried further objectively, but rather grounds all cogni­
tion of its object,b yet this does not prevent a proof from the subjective
sources of the possibility of a cognition of an object in general from
being possible, indeed even necessary, since otherwise the proposition
would raise the greatest suspicion of being a merely surreptitious
assertion.
Second, we will limit ourselves merely to those principles that are rea Verhdltnis
b

Objects
278

Section I. On the highest principle of all analytic judgments

lated to the categories. The principlesfl of the transcendental aesthetic,
therefore, according to which space and time are the conditions of the
possibility of all things as appearances, as well as the restriction of these
principles, namely that they cannot be related to things in themselves,
do not belong within our confined field of investigation. Likewise the
mathematical principles do not constitute any part of this system, since
they are drawn only from intuition, not from the pure concept of the
understanding; yet their possibility, since they are likewise synthetic a
priori judgments, necessarily finds a place here, not in order to prove
their correctness and apodictic certainty, which is not at all necessary,
but only to make comprehensible and to deduce the possibility of such
evident cognitions a priori.
But we must also speak of the principle of analytic judgments, in contrast, to be sure, to that of synthetic judgments, with which we are properly concerned, since precisely this contrast will free the theory of the
latter from all misunderstanding and lay their particular nature clearly
before our eyes.

B 1 89

A I 50

The System of the Principles of Pure Understanding
First Section
On the supreme principle
of all analytic judgments.55
Whatever the content of our cognition may be, and however it may be
related to the object,b the general though to be sure only negative con­
dition of all of our judgments whatsoever is that they do not contradict
themselves; otherwise these judgments in themselves (even without regard to the objecty are nothing. But even if there is no contradiction
within our judgment, it can nevertheless combine concepts in a way not
entailed by the object, or even without any ground being given to us either a priori or a posteriori that would justify such a judgment, and thus,
for all that a judgment may be free of any internal contradiction, it can
still be either false or groundless.
Now the proposition that no predicate pertains to a thing that contradicts it is called the principled of contradiction, and is a general
though merely negative criterion of all truth, but on that account it also
belongs merely to logic, since it holds of cognitions merely as cogni-

Principien
Object
, Object
d Satz: ordinarily translated as "proposition," it will be translated as "principle" in the
phrase "Satz des Widerspruchs" throughout this section.

a

b

279

B 1 90

AI51

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 191

AI 52

B 192

tions in general, without regard to their content, and says that contra­
diction entirely annihilates and cancels them.
But one can also make a positive use of it, i.e., not merely to ban false­
hood and error (insofar as it rests on contradiction), but also to cognize
truth. For, if the judgment is analytic, whether it be negative or affir­
mative, its truth must always be able to be cognized sufficiently in ac­
cordance with the principle of contradiction. For the contrary of that
which as a concept already lies and is thought in the cognition of the
objecta is always correctly denied, while the concept itself must necessarily be affirmed of it, since its opposite would contradict the object.b
Hence we must also allow the principle of contradiction to count
as the universal and completely sufficient principle' of all analytic
cognition; but its authority and usefulness does not extend beyond this,
as a sufficient criterion of truth. For that no cognition can be opposed
to it without annihilating itself certainly makes this principled into a conditio sine qua non, but not into a determining ground of the truth of our
cognition. Since we now really have to do only with the synthetic part
of our cognition, we will, to be sure, always be careful not to act con­
trary to this inviolable principle, but we cannot expect any advice from
it in regard to the truth of this sort of cognition.
There is, however, still one formula of this famous principle, al­
though denuded of all content and merely formal, which contains a syn­
thesis that is incautiously and entirely unnecessarily mixed into it. This
is: "It is impossible for something to be and not to be at the same
time." In addition to the fact that apodictic certainty is superfluously
appended to this (by means of the word "impossible"), which must yet
be understood from the proposition itself, the proposition is affected by
the condition of time, and as it were says: "A thing A, which is some­
thing B, cannot at the same time be non-B, although it can easily be
both (B as well as non-B) in succession." E.g., a person who is young
cannot be old at the same time, but one and the same person can very
well be young at one time and not young, i.e., old, at another. Now the
principle of contradiction, as a merely logical principle, must not limit
its claims to temporal relations.' Hence such a formula is entirely con­
trary to its aim. The misunderstanding results merely from our first ab­
stracting a predicate of a thing from its concept and subsequently
connecting its opposite with this predicate, which never yields a con­
tradiction with the subject, but only with the predicate that is combined
with it synthetically, and indeed only when both the first and the sec=

=

AI53

a Objects

b Objecte
, Principium
d Satz

, Zeitverhiiltnisse
2 80

Section II. On the highest principle of synthetic judgments

ond predicate are affirmed at the same time. If I say "A person who is
unlearned is not learned," the condition at the same time must hold;
for one who is unlearned at one time can very well be learned at another
time. But if I say that "No unlearned person is learned," then the
proposition is analytic, since the mark (of unlearnedness) is now com­
prised in the concept of the subject, and then the negative proposition
follows immediately from the principle of contradiction, without the
condition at the same time having to be added. This is also then the
cause why I have above so altered the formula of it that the nature of an
analytic proposition is thereby clearly expressed.
Of the System of the Principles of Pure Understanding
Second Section

B 193

A 1 54

On the supreme principle of all synthetic judgments.56
The explanation of the possibility of synthetic judgments is a problem
with which general logic has nothing to do, indeed whose name it need
not even know. But in a transcendental logic it is the most important
business of all, and indeed the only business if the issue is the possibil­
ity of synthetic a priori judgments and likewise the conditions and the
domain of their validity. For by completing this task transcendental
logic can fully satisfy its goal of determining the domain and boundaries
of pure understanding.
In the analytic judgment I remain with the given concept in order to
discern something about it. If it is an affirmative judgment, I only as­
cribe to this concept that which is already thought in it; if it is a nega­
tive judgment, I only exclude the opposite of this concept from it. In
synthetic judgments, however, I am to go beyond the given concept in
order to consider something entirely different from what is thought in
it as in a relation° to it, a relationb which is therefore never one of either
identity, or contradiction, and one where neither the truth nor the error
of the judgment can be seen in the judgment itself.
If it is thus conceded that one must go beyond a given concept in
order to compare it synthetically with another, then a third thing is nec­
essary in which alone the synthesis of two concepts can originate. But
now what is this third thing, as the medium of all synthetic judgments?
There is only one totalityc in which all of our representations are con­
tained, namely inner sense and its a priori form, time. The synthesis of
representations rests on the imagination, but their synthetic unity
(which is requisite for judgment), on the unity of apperception. Herein
a Verhdltnis
b
,

Verhdltnis

Inbegriff

281

B 194
A 155

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B I95
A

I 56

B I96
A I 57

therefore is the possibility of synthetic judgments, and, since all three
contain the sources of a priori representations, also the possibility of
pure synthetic judgments, to be sought, indeed on these grounds they
will even be necessary if a cognition of objects is to come about which
rests solely on the synthesis of the representations.
If a cognition is to have objective reality, i.e., to be related to an ob­
ject, and is to have significance and sense in that object, the object must
be able to be given in some way. Without that the concepts are empty,
and through them one has, to be sure, thought but not in fact cognized
anything through this thinking, but rather merely played with representations. To give an object, if this is not again meant only mediately,
but it is rather to be exhibited immediately in intuition, is nothing other
than to relate its representation to experience (whether this be actual or
still possible). Even space and time, as pure as these concepts are from
everything empirical and as certain as it is that they are represented in
the mind completely a priori, would still be without objective validity
and without sense and significance if their necessary use on the objects
of experience were not shown; indeed, their representation is a mere
schema, which is always related to the reproductive imagination that
calls forth the objects of experience, without which they would have no
significance; and thus it is with all concepts without distinction.
The possibility of experience is therefore that which gives all of our
cognitions a priori objective reality. Now experience rests on the syn­
thetic unity of appearances, i.e., on a synthesis according to concepts of
the object of appearances in general, without which it would not even
be cognition but rather a rhapsody of perceptions, which would not fit
together in any context in accordance with rules of a thoroughly con­
nected (possible) consciousness, thus not into the transcendental and
necessary unity of apperception. Experience therefore has principles a of
its form which ground it a priori, namely general rules of unity in the
synthesis of appearances, whose objective reality, as necessary condi­
tions, can always be shown in experience, indeed in its possibility. But
apart from this relation synthetic a priori propositions are entirely im­
possible, since they would then have no third thing, namely a pure ob­
ject,b in which the synthetic unity of their concepts could establish
objective reality.
Thus although in synthetic judgments we cognize a priori so much
about space in general or about the shapes that the productive imagi­
nation draws in it that we really do not need any experience for this, still
this cognition would be nothing at all, but an occupation with a mere
figment of the brain, if space were not to be regarded as the condition
a Principien
b

reinen Gegenstand; Erdmann suggests keinem Gegenstand, i.e., "no object."
282

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

of the appearances which constitute the matter of outer experience;
hence those pure synthetic judgments are related, although only medi­
ately, to possible experience, or rather to its possibility itself, and on
that alone is the objective validity of their synthesis grounded.
Thus since experience, as empirical synthesis, is in its possibility the
only kind of cognition that gives all other synthesis reality, as a priori
cognition it also possesses truth (agreement with the object)O only insofar as it contains nothing more than what is necessary for the synthetic
unity of experience in general.
The supreme principleb of all synthetic judgments is, therefore: Every
object stands under the necessaty conditions of the synthetic unity of the
manifold of intuition in a possible experience.
In this way synthetic a priori judgments are possible, if we relate the
formal conditions of a priori intuition, the synthesis of the imagination,
and its necessary unity in a transcendental apperception to a possible
cognition of experience in general, and say: The conditions of the pos­
sibility of experience in general are at the same time conditions of the
possibility of the objects of experience, and on this account have ob­
jective validity in a synthetic judgment a priori.'

B 1 97
A I 58

Of the System of the Principles of Pure Understanding
Third Section
Systematic representation of all synthetic
principles of pure understanding.
That there are principles anywhere at all is to be ascribed solely to the
pure understanding, which is not only the faculty of rules in regard to
that which happens, but is rather itself the source of the principles in
accordance with which everything (that can even come before us as an
object) necessarily stands under rules, since, without such rules, ap­
pearances could never amount to cognition of an object corresponding
to them. Even laws of nature, if they are considered as principles of the
empirical use of the understanding, at the same time carry with them an
expression of necessity, thus at least the presumption of determination
by grounds that are a priori and valid prior to all experience.57 But witha Object
b

C

Principium

The following two notes are entered in Kant's copy at A 1 5 8 :
"How are the objects determined i n accordance with the concept a priori?" ( E LXII,
p. 2 8; 2 3 :28)
"The [principles] can never be proved from mere concepts, as if they dealt with
things in themselves, but can only be proved from the possibility of the perception of
things." (E LXIII, p. 29; 2 p 8)

283

B 198
A 159

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B I99
A I 60

B 200

out exception all laws of nature stand under higher principles of the un­
derstanding, as they only apply the latter to particular cases of appear­
ance. Thus these higher principles alone provide the concept, which
contains the condition and as it were the exponents for a rule in gen­
eral, while experience provides the case which stands under the rule.
There can really be no danger that one will regard merely empirical
principles as principles of the pure understanding, or vice versa; for the
necessity according to concepts that distinguishes the latter, and whose
lack in every empirical proposition, no matter how generally it may hold,
is easily perceived, can easily prevent this confusion. There are, however,
pure principles a priori that I may nevertheless not properly ascribe to
the pure understanding, since they are not derived from pure concepts
but rather from pure intuitions (although by means of the understand­
ing); the understanding, however, is the faculty of concepts. Mathe­
matics has principles of this sort, but their application to experience,
thus their objective validity, indeed the possibility of such synthetic a pri­
ori cognition (its deduction) still always rests on the pure understanding.
Hence I will not count among my principles those of mathematics,
but I will include those on which the possibility and objective a priori
validity of the latter are grounded, and which are thus to be regarded as
the principle of these principles,a and that proceed from concepts to
the intuition but not from the intuition to concepts.
In the application of the pure concepts of understanding to possible
experience the use of their synthesis is either mathematical58 or dy­
namical: for it pertains partly merely to the intuition, partly to the ex­
istence of an appearance in general. The a priori conditions of intuition,
however, are necessary throughout in regard to a possible experience,
while those of the existence of the objectsb of a possible empirical intu­
ition are in themselves only contingent. Hence the principles of the
mathematical use will be unconditionally necessary, i.e., apodictic, while
the principles of the dynamical use, to be sure, also carry with them the
character of an a priori necessity, but only under the condition of em­
pirical thinking in an experience, thus only mediately and indirectly;
consequently these do not contain the immediate evidence that is char­
acteristic of the former (though their universal certainty in relation to
experience is not thereby injured). Yet this will be better judged at the
conclusion of this system of principles.
The table of categories gives us entirely natural direction for the
table of principles, since these principles are nothing other than rules of
a als Principium dieser Grundsdtze, i.e., as the general principle giving objective validity to

b

the propositions of mathematics which are themselves synthetic a priori according to the
"Transcendental Aesthetic."

Objecte
2 84

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

the objective use of the categories. All principles of the pure under­
standing are, accordingly, 59

I.
Axioms
of intuition.
3·
Analogies
of experience.

2.
Anticipations
of perception.

4·
Postulates
of empirical thinking
in general. a

I have chosen these titles with care, in order not to leave unnoted the
distinctions with respect to the evidence and the exercise of these principles. But it will soon be shown that as far as the evidence as well as the
a priori determination of appearances according to the categories of
magnitude and quality are concerned (if one attends solely to the form
of the latter), their principles are importantly distinct from those of the
two others; while the former are capable of an intuitive certainty, the
latter are capable only of a discursive certainty, though in both cases
they are capable of a complete certainty. I will therefore call the former
the mathematical and the latter the dynamical principles.*,b,60 But one
* [Note added in the second edition:] <All combination (conjunctio) is either
composition' (compositio) or connectiond (nexus). The former is the syna

The following note is inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition:
" 1 . Axioms of Intuition. Formal.
pure mathematics pura
applied mathematics dynamics.
Mathematics
2. Anticipations of Perception. Real.
-

-

}

Perception is the consciousness
ofan appearance (J;efore any concept)
3. Analogies of Experience
4. Postulates of empirical
Thinking in general

Physiology

{ I,

Physical

2 . Metaphysical

Sensation not beyond
experience"

b
,

d

(E uav, p. 29; � 3 '2 8)
Changed in Kant's copy of the first edition to: "the physiological principles" (E Lxv, p.
29; 2 3:46), though obviously this change was not incorporated into the second edition.

Zusammenhang
Verknupfung
285

B 201
A 162

B 20!

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 202

should note well that I here have in mind the principles of mathematics just as little in the one case as the principles of general (physical) dy­
namics in the other, but rather have in mind only the principles of the
pure understanding in relationo to the inner sense (without distinction
of the representations which are given therein), through which the for­
mer principles all acquire their possibility. I am therefore titling them
more with respect to their application than on account of their content,
and I now proceed to the consideration of them in the same order in
which they are represented in the table.