
The Transcendental Analytic
Second Book
The Analytic of Principles

General logic is constructed on a plan that corresponds quite precisely
with the division of the higher faculties of cognition. These are: un­
derstanding, the power of judgment, and reason. In its analytic that
doctrine accordingly deals with concepts, judgments, and inferences,
corresponding exactly to the functions and the order of those powers of
mind, which are comprehended under the broad designation of under­
standing in general.
Since merely formal logic, so conceived, abstracts from all content of
cognition (whether it be pure or empirical), and concerns itself merely
with the form of thinking (of discursive cognition) in general, it can also
include in its analytical part the canon for reason, the form of which has
its secure precept, into which there can be a priori insight through mere
analysis of the actions of reason into their moments, without taking into
consideration the particular nature of the cognition about which it is
employed.
Transcendental logic, since it is limited to a determinate content,
namely that of pure a priori cognitions alone, cannot imitate general
logic in this division. For it turns out that the transcendental use of
reason is not objectively valid at all, thus does not belong to the logic
of truth, i.e., the analytic, but rather, as a logic of illusion, requires a
special part of the scholastic edifice, under the name of the transcen­
dental dialectic.
Understanding and the power of judgment accordingly have their
canon of objectively valid, thus true use in transcendental logic, and
therefore belong in its analytical part. Only reason in its attempts to
make out something about objects a priori and to extend cognition beyond the bounds of possible experience is wholly and entirely dialectical, and its illusory assertions do not fi t into a canon of the sort that the
analytic ought to contain.
The analytic of principles will accordingly be solely a canon for the
power of judgment that teaches it to apply to appearances the con­
cepts of the understanding, which contain the condition for rules a pri2 67

B I69

A131
B 1 70

B 1 7 1 /A l p

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II

ori. For this reason,a as I take the actual principles of the understand­
ing as my theme I will make use of the designation of a doctrine of the
power of judgment, through which this enterprise may be more pre­
cisely designated.
Introduction
On the transcendental power of judgment
in general.

A I 3 3 /B I 72

A I 341B 1 7 3

A I 3 3 1B 1 7 2

A I 341 B 1 7 3

If the understanding in general is explained as the faculty of rules, then
the power of judgment is the faculty of subsuming under rules, i.e., of
determining whether something stands under a given rule (casus datae
legis)h or not. General logic contains no precepts at all for the power of
judgment, and moreover cannot contain them. For since it abstracts
from all content of cognition, nothing remains to it but the business
of analytically dividing the mere form of cognition into concepts, judgments, and inferences, and thereby achieving formal rules for all use of
the understanding. Now if it wanted to show generally how one ought
to subsume under these rules, i.e., distinguish whether something
stands under them or not, this could not happen except once again
through a rule. But just because this is a rule, it would demand another
instruction for the power of judgment, and so it becomes clear that al­
though the understanding is certainly capable of being instructed and
equipped through rules, the power of judgment is a special talent that
cannot be taught but only practiced. Thus this is also what is specific to
so-called mother-wit, the lack of which cannot be made good by any
school; for,c although such a school can provide a limited understanding
with plenty of rules borrowed from the insight of others and as it were
graft these onto it, nevertheless the faculty for making use of them cor­
rectly must belong to the student himself, and in the absence of such a
natural gift no rule that one might prescribe to him for this aim is safe
from misuse.*, d A physician therefore, a judge, or a statesman, can have
* The lack of the power o f judgment is that which is properly called stupidity,
and such a failing is not to be helped. A dull or limited head, which is lacking
nothing but the appropriate degree of understanding and its proper concepts,
may well be trained through instruction, even to the point of becoming
learned. But since it would usually still lack the power of judgment (the secunda Petn),e it is not at all uncommon to encounter very learned men who in
n Ursache
b case of the given law
C

In the first edition, "since."

d Kant struck this footnote from his copy of the first edition (E, p.

let it remain in the second.
, the companion of Peter

268

27), but nevertheless

Introduction

many fine pathological, juridical, or political rules in his head, of which
he can even be a thorough teacher, and yet can easily stumble in their
application, either because he is lacking in natural power of judgment
(though not in understanding), and to be sure understands the univer­
sal in abstracto but" cannot distinguish whether a case in concreto belongs
under it, or also because he has not received adequate training for this
judgment through examples and actual business. This is also the sole
and great utility of examples: that they sharpen the power of judgment.
F or as far as the correctness and precision of the insight of the under­
standing is concerned, examples more usually do it some damage, since
they only seldom adequately fulfill the condition of the rule (as casus in
terminis)b and beyond this often weaken the effort of the understanding
to gain sufficient insight into rules in the universal and independently
of the particular circumstances of experience, and thus in the end ac­
custom us to use those rules more like formulas than like principles.
Thus examples are the leading-strings of the power of judgment, which
he who lacks the natural talent for judgment can never do without. 50
But now although general logic can give no precepts to the power
of judgment, things are quite different with transcendental logic, so
that it even seems that the latter has as its proper business to correct
and secure the power of judgment in the use of the pure understanding
through determinate rules. For although for expansion of the role of
the understanding in the field of pure cognitions a priori, hence as a
doctrine, philosophy seems entirely unnecessary or rather ill-suited,
since after all its previous attempts little or no territory has been won,
yet as critique, in order to avoid missteps in judgment (lapsusjudici)d in
the use of the few pure concepts of the understanding that we have, phi­
losophy with all of its perspicacity and art of scrutiny is called up (even
though its utility is then only negative).
But the peculiar thing about transcendental philosophy is this: that in
addition to the rule (or rather the general condition for rules), which is
given in the pure concept of the understanding, it can at the same time
indicate a priori the case to which the rules ought to be applied. The
cause o f the advantage that it has in this regard over all other didactic
sciences (except for mathematics) lies just here: that it deals with conthe use of their science frequently give glimpses of that lack, which is never to
be ameliorated.
a "but" added in the second edition.

b

I.e., as a limiting case.
, Following Erdmann in reading "derselben" instead of "desselben, thus taking "the power
of judgment" as its antecedent.
d lapses of judp:lent
"

269

B 1 74
A I35

B 175

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II
cepts that are to be related to their objects a priori, hence its objective
A 136

validity cannot b e established a posteriori, for that would leave that dig­

nity of theirs entirely untouched; rather it must at the same time offer
a general but sufficient characterization of the conditions under which
objects in harmony with those concepts can be given, for otherwise they

would be without all content, and thus would be mere logical forms and
not pure concepts of the understanding.
This transcendental doctrine of the power of judgment will con­
tain two chapters: the first, which deals with the sensible condition
under which alone pure concepts of the understanding can be employed,
i.e., with the schematism of the pure understanding; and the second,
which deals with those synthetic judgments that How a priori from pure
concepts of the understanding under these conditions and ground all
other cognitions a priori, i.e., with the principles of pure understanding.

270

aThe Transcendental Doctrine
of the Power ofJudgment
(or Analytic of Principles)
First Chapter
On the schematism b of the
pure concepts of the understanding5I

In all subsumptions of an object under a concept the representations of
the former must be homogeneous with the latter, i.e., the concept
must contain that which is represented in the object that is to be sub­
sumed under it, for that is just what is meant by the expression "an ob­
ject is contained under a concept." Thus the empirical concept of a
plate has homogeneity with the pure geometrical concept of a circle,
for the roundness that is thought in the former can be intuited in the
l atter.
Now pure concepts of the understanding, however, in comparison
with empirical (indeed in general sensible) intuitions, are entirely un­
homogeneous, and can never be encountered in any intuition. Now

n

The following notes pertaining to the general argument of the next section are all in­
serted on A I 3 7 in Kant's copy of the first edition :
"We cannot think any intuitions or relations [Verhiiltni.l:,e] of intuitions for the cate­
gories, rather they must be given in experience. Thus all principles pertain merely to
possible experience, since this is possible only in accordance with the form of the unity

of understanding." (E LUI, p. 2 7 ; 2 3 : 2 7)
"The incomprehensibility of the categories sterns from the fact that we cannot have
insight into the synthetic unity of appercepti on. " (E LIv, p. 27; 23:27)
"The schema of time a line." (E LV; p. 2 7; 2 3 : 2 7)
"The possibility of an object [Objects] of the concept of the understanding, e.g., a

cause or alf1tntcrciultt, canno t be thought a priori, consequently only an experience can

be thought with the conditions under which it can become experience in combination

with the concept of the understanding." (E LVI, p. 2 7; 2 3 : 2 7)

b Kant's copy of the first edition adds this note: "The synthesis of the understanding is

called thus if it determines the inner sense in accordance with the unity of appercep­
tion." (E LVII, p. 27; 2 3 : 2 7)

271

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. I

B I77/A I 3 8

B 1 78
A139

how is the subsumption of the latter under the former, thus the appli­
cation of the category to appearances possible, since no one would say
that the category, e.g., causality, could also be intuited through the
senses and is contained in the appearance? This question, so natural and
important, is really the cause which makes a transcendental doctrine of
the power of judgment necessary, in order, namely, to show the possi­
bility of applying pure concepts of the understanding to appearances
in general. In all other sciences, where the concepts through which the
object is thought in general are not so different and heterogeneous
from those that represent it in concreto, as it is given, it is unnecessary to
offer a special discussion of the application of the former to the latter.
Now it is clear that there must be a third thing, which must stand in
homogeneity with the category on the one hand and the appearance on
the other, and makes possible the application of the former to the lat­
ter. This mediating representation must be pure (without anything em­
pirical) and yet intellectual on the one hand and sensible on the other.
Such a representation is the transcendental schema.
The concept of the understanding contains pure synthetic unity of
the manifold in general. Time, as the formal condition of the manifold
of inner sense, thus of the connection of all representations, contains an
a priori manifold in pure intuition. Now a transcendental time-deter­
mination is homogeneous with the category (which constitutes its
unity) insofar as it is universal and rests on a rule a priori. But it is on
the other hand homogeneous with the appearance insofar as time is
contained in every empirical representation of the manifold. Hence an
application of the category to appearances becomes possible by means
of the transcendental time-determination which, as the schema of the
concept of the understanding, mediates the subsumption of the latter
under the former.
After what has been shown in the deduction of the categories, hope­
fully no one will be in doubt about how to decide the question, whether
these pure concepts of the understanding are of merely empirical or also
of transcendental use, i.e., whether, as conditions of a possible experi­
ence, they relate a priori solely to appearances, or whether, as conditions
of the possibility of things in general, they can be extended to objects in
themselves (without any restriction to our sensibility). For we have seen
there that concepts are entirely impossible,a and cannot have any signif­
icance, where an object is not given either for them themselves or at
least for the elements of which they consist, consequently they cannot
pertain to things in themselves (without regard to how and whether they
may be given to us) at all; that, further, the modification of our sensibila

Altered in Kant's copy of the first edition to "are for us without sense" (E LVIII, p. 2 8;

2 3 :46).

2 72

On the schematism of pure concepts of understanding"

ity is the only way in which objects are given to us; and, finally, that pure
concepts a priori, in addition to the function of the understanding in the
category, must also contain a priori formal conditions of sensibility
(namely of the inner sense) that contain the general condition under
which alone the category can be applied to any object. We will call this
formal and pure condition of the sensibility, to which the use of the concept of the understanding is restricted, the schema of this concept of
the understanding, and we will call the procedure of the understanding
with these schemata the schematism of the pure understanding.
The schema is in itself always only a product of the imagination; but
since the synthesis of the latter has as its aim no individual intuition but
rather only the unity in the determination of sensibility, the schema is
to be distinguished from an image. Thus, if I place five points in a
row, . . . . . , this is an image of the number five. On the contrary, if I
only think a number in general, which could be five or a hundred, this
thinking is more the representation of a method for representing a mul­
titude (e.g., a thousand) in accordance with a certain concept than the
image itself, which in this case I could survey and compare with the
concept only with difficulty. Now this representation of a general procedure of the imagination for providing a concept with its image is what
I call the schema for this concept.
In fact it is not images of objects but schemata that ground our pure
sensible conceptsY No image of a triangle would ever be adequate to
the concept of it. For it would not attain the generality of the concept,
which makes this valid for all triangles, right or acute, etc., but would
always be limited to one part of this sphere. The schema of the triangle
can never exist anywhere except in thought, and signifies a rule of the
synthesis of the imagination with regard to pure shapes in space. Even
less does an object of experience or an image of it ever reach the empirical concept, rather the latter is always related immediately to the
schema of the imagination, as a rule for the determination of our intuition in accordance with a certain general concept. The concept of a
dog signifies a rule in accordance with which my imagination can specify the shape of a four-footed animal in general, without being re­
stricted to any single particular shape that experience offers me or any
possible image that I can exhibit in concreto. This schematism of our un­
derstanding with regard to appearances and their mere form is a hidden
art in the depths of the human soul, whose true operations we can divine from nature and lay unveiled before our eyes only with difficulty.
We can say only this much: the image is a product of the empirical faculty of productive imagination, the schema of sensible concepts (such
a

In the first edition the right-hand heading here changes to "On the Schematism of the
Categories."

273

B 1 79

A 140

B 1 80
A I41

B 181

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. I
A 142

B 182

A 143

as figures in space) is a product and as it were a monogram of pure a pri­
ori imagination, through which and in accordance with which the im­
ages first become possible, but which must be connected with the
concept, to which they are in themselves never fully congruent, always
only by means of the schema that they designate. The schema of a pure
concept of the understanding, on the contrary, is something that can
never be brought to an image at all, but is rather only the pure synthe­
sis, in accord with a rule of unity according to concepts in general,
which the category expresses, and is a transcendental product of the
imagination, which concerns the determination of the inner sense in
general, in accordance with conditions of itsa form (time) in regard to
all representations, insofar as these are to be connected together a pri­
ori in one concept in accord with the unity of apperception.
Rather than pausing now for a dry and boring analysis of what is re­
quired for transcendental schemata of pure concepts of the understand­
ing in general, we would rather present them according to the order of
the categories and in connection with these.
The pure image of all magnitudes (quantorum) for outer sense is
space; for all objects of the senses in general, it is time. The pure
schema of magnitude (quantitatis), however, as a concept of the un­
derstanding, is number, which is a representation that summarizes the
successive addition of one (homogeneous) unit to another. Thus number is nothing other than the unity of the synthesis of the manifold of a
homogeneous intuition in general, becauseb I generate time itself in the
apprehension of the intuition.53
Realityc is in the pure concept of the understanding that to which a
sensationd in general corresponds, that, therefore, the concept of which
in itself indicates a being (in time). Negation is that the concept of
which represents a non-being (in time). The opposition of the two thus
takes place in the distinction of one and the same time as either a filled
or an empty time. Since time is only the form of intuition, thus of ob­
jects as appearances, that which corresponds to the sensation in these is
the transcendental matter of all objects, as things in themselves (thinga

b

In his copy of the first edition, Kant changed this from "ihrer" to "seiner, " perhaps
thereby intending to change its antecedent from "determination" to "inner sense" (E
LIX, p. 2 8; 2 3 =46).

dadurch, daft
, Realitdt

d Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition:

"Sensation is that which is really empirical in our cognition, and the real of the rep­
resentations of inner sense in contrast to their form, time. Sensation therefore lies out­
side all a priori cognition. Only therein, how one sensation differs from another with
regard to quality, beyond the a priori degrees, but not of their quantity. [sic]" (E LX, p.
28; 2 3: 2 7)

2 74

On the schematism of pure concepts of understanding

hood,a reality). Now every sensation has a degree or magnitude,
through which it can more or less fill the same time, i.e., the inner sense
in regard to the same representation of an object, until it ceases in noth­
ingness (= 0 = negatio). Hence there is a relationb and connection between, or rather a transition from reality to negation, that makes every
reality representable a s a quantum, and the schema o f a reality, as the
quantity of something insofar as it fills time, is just this continuous and
uniform generation of that quantity in time, as one descends in time
from the sensation that has a certain degree to its disappearance or
gradually ascends from negation to its magnitude.
The schema of substance is the persistence of the real in time, i.e., the
representation of the real as a substratum of empirical time-determination in general, which therefore endures while everything else changes.
(Time itself does not elapse, but the existence of that which is changeable elapses in it. To time, therefore, which is itself unchangeable and
lasting, there corresponds in appearance that which is unchangeable in
existence, i.e., substance, and in it alone can the succession and simultaneity of appearances be determined in regard to time.)
The schema of the cause and of the causalityc of a thing in general is
the real upon which, whenever it is posited, something else always fol­
lows. It therefore consists in the succession of the manifold insofar as it
is subject to a rule.
The schema of community (reciprocity), or of the reciprocal causal­
ity of substances with regard to their accidents, is the simultaneity of
the determinations of the one with those of the other, in accordance
with a general rule.
The schema of possibility is the agreement of the synthesis of various
representations with the conditions of time in general (e.g., since op­
posites cannot exist in one thing at the same time, they can only exist
one after another), thus the determination of the representation of a
thing to some time.
The schema of actualityd is existence at a determinate time.
The schema of necessity ise the existence of an object at all times.54
Now one sees from all this that the schema of each category contains
and makes representable: in the case of magnitude, the generation (syn­
thesis) of time itself, in the successive apprehension of an object; in the
case of the schema of quality, the synthesis of sensation (perception)
with the representation of time, or the filling of time; in the case of the
Sachheit
Verhiiltnis
, der Ursache und der Causalitiit
d Wirklichkeit
a

b

, "is" added in the second edition.

275

B I8 3

A 144

B 1 84

A 145

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. I

B 1 85

A 146

B 1 86

schema of relation,a the relationb of the perceptions among themselves
to all time (i.e., in accordance with a rule of time-determination); fi­
nally, in the schema of modality and its categories, time itself, as the
correlate of the determination of whether and how an object belongs to
time. The schemata are therefore nothing but a priori time-determi­
nations in accordance with rules, and these concern, according to the
order of the categories, the time-series, the content of time, the
order of time, and finally the sum total of timec in regard to all pos­
sible objects.
From this it is clear that the schematism of the understanding
through the transcendental synthesis of imagination comes down to
nothing other than the unity of all the manifold of intuition in inner
sense, and thus indirectly to the unity of apperception, as the function
that corresponds to inner sense (to a receptivity). Thus the schemata of
the concepts of pure understanding are the true and sole conditions for
providing them with a relation to objects/ thus with significance, and
hence the categories are in the end of none but a possible empirical use,
since they merely serve to subject appearances to general rules of syn­
thesis through grounds of an a priori necessary unity (on account of the
necessary unification of all consciousness in an original apperception),
and thereby to make them fit for a thoroughgoing connection in one
experience.
All of our cognitions, however, lie in the entirety of all possible ex­
perience, and transcendental truth, which precedes all empirical truth
and makes it possible, consists in the general relation to this.
But it is also obvious that, although the schemata of sensibility first
realize the categories, yet they likewise also restrict them, i.e., limit
them to conditions that lie outside the understanding (namely, in sensi­
bility). Hence the schema is really only the phenomenon, or the sensi­
ble concept of an object, in agreement with the category. (Numerus est
quantitas phaenomenon, sensatio realitas phaenomenon, constans et per­
durabile rerum substantia phaenomenon aeternitas, necessitas phaenomena
etc.).e Now if we leave aside a restricting condition, it may seem as if we
amplify the previously limited concept; thus the categories in their pure
significance, without any conditions of sensibility, should hold for
things in general, as they are, instead of their schemata merely repre­
senting them how they appear, and they would therefore have a sig-

A 147

a Relation
b

Verhiiltnis
, Zeitinbewiff
d Objecte
, "Number is the quantity [of the] phenomenon, sensation the reality [of the] phenomenon,
constancy and the endurance of things the substance [of the] phenomenon, eteruity the
necessity [of] phenomena, etc."

276

On the schematism of pure concepts of understanding

nificance independent of all schemata and extending far beyond them.
In fact, even after abstraction from all sensible condition, significance,
but only a logical significance of the mere unity of representations, is
left to the pure concepts of the understanding, but no object and thus
no significance is given to them that could yield a concepta of the obj ect.b Thus, e.g., if one leaves out the sensible determination of persistence, substance would signify nothing more than a something that can
be thought as a subject (without being a predicate of something else).
Now out of this representation I can make nothing, as it shows me
nothing at all about what determinations the thing that is to count as
such a first subject i s to have. Without schemata, therefore, the categories are only functions of the understanding for concepts, but do not
represent any object. This significance comes to them from sensibility,
which realizes the understanding at the same time as it restricts it.
a

h

Changed in Kant's copy of the first edition to "cognition" (E LXI, p. 28; 2 3 :46).

Object

2 77

B 187
