
4·

The postulates
of empirical thinking in general. 78
I . \Vhatever agrees with the formal conditions of experience (in ac­
cordance with intuition and concepts) is possible.
2 . That which is connectedb with the material conditions of experience (of sensation) is actual.
3 . That whose connection' with the actual is determined in accordance
with general conditions of experience is (exists) necessarily.d
* The unity of the world-whole, in which all appearances are to be connected, is
obviously a mere conclusion from the tacitly assumed principle of the community of all substances that are simultaneous: for, were they isolated, they would
not as parts constitute a whole, and were their connection (interaction of the
manifold) not already necessary on account of simultaneity, then one could not
infer from the latter, as a merely ideal relation, to the former, as a real one.
Nevertheless we have shown, in its proper place, that community is really the
ground of the possibility of an empirical cognition of coexistence, and that one
therefore really only infers from the latter back to the former, as its condition.
Principien
zusammenhiingt
, Zusammenha12g

n

b

d The following notes are entered in Kant's copy of the first edition following A2 I 8:

"The contingency of the alterable is only inferred from the fact that in accordance
with the second analogy every state of its existence always requires a ground, and not
vice versa, that it always requires a ground because it is contingent. We call absolutely
contingent that which has no sufficient ground: never here, since it is never complete."
(E LXXXVII, p. 35: 2 3 : 3 2)
"On possibility: That the concept of which can be given in a corresponding intuition
is possible." (E LXXXVIII, p. 3 5 : 2 3 '32)
"What can be thought indeterminately in any time [is possible] ." ( E LXXXIX, p. 3 5 :
2 3 : 3 2)
"That which is determined in time [is actual] ." (E XC, p. 36: 2 3 :32)
"That which is determined through the concept of time itself [is (exists) necessar­
ily]." (E XCI, p. 36: 2 3 '32)

321

B 2 66

A 2 I S / B 265

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 2 19

B 267

A220

Elucidation
The categories of modality have this peculiarity: as a determination of
the objecta they do not augment the concept to which they are ascribed
in the least, but rather express only the relationb to the faculty of cog­
nition. If the concept of a thing is already entirely complete, I can still
ask about this object whether it is merely possible, or also actual, or, if
it is the latter, whether it is also necessary? No further determinations
in the objectC itself are hereby thought; rather, it is only asked: how is
the object itself (together with all its determinations) related to the un­
derstanding and its empirical use, to the empirical power of judgment,
and to reason (in its application to experience)?
For this very reason the principles of modality are also nothing fur­
ther than definitions of the concepts of possibility, actuality, and neces­
sity in their empirical use, and thus at the same time restrictions of all
categories to merely empirical use, without any permission and al­
lowance for their transcendental use. For if the categories are not to
have a merely logical significance and analytically express the form of
thinking, but are to concern things and their possibility, actuality, and
necessity, then they must pertain to possible experience and its syn­
thetic unity, in which alone objects of cognition are given.
The postulate of the possibility of things thus requires that their con-

"That which is determined in time and space is actual. Against idealism." (E XCII,
p. 36; 2 3 =32)
"Everything actual is necessary, either absolutely or hypothetically. That, however,
holds only of noumena; for absolute contingency of things in themselves cannot be.
thought." (E XCIII, p. 36; 2 n 2)
"That which exists, thus in other things outside our thoughts, is thoroughly deter­
mined. This proposition is the principle [Princip] of the concept of an ens realissimus
[most real being] as conceptus originarii [concept of the origin]. Whence the concept of
the absolute necessity of this?
"Therein also belongs the proposition that all negations are limitations. This is the
synthetic method of reason. " ( E XCrv; p. 36; 2 3 : 3 2-3)
"We do not attribute contingency to substances, but only to the alterable accidents.
Causes." (E XCv, p. 36; 2 3 = 33)
"The three criteria of hypotheses, always only in relation to experience. The possi­
bility of the hypothesis, the reality of that which is thought up in behalf of the hypoth­
esis. Its necessity must be certain." ( E XCVI, p. 36; 2 3: 3 3)
a

b

Objects
In this section, as in the preceding, Kant continues the frequent use of Verhalwis rather
than Beziehung, even here where he is speaking about a relation between the cognitive
faculty and its object rather than among objects, and thus by the usage of the
"Transcendental Aesthetic" the latter term might have been expected. Unless otherwise
noted, our "relation" translates Verhalwis.

, Objecte
322

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

cept agree with the formal conditions of an experience in general. This,
however, namely the objective form of experience in general, contains all
synthesis that is requisite for the cognition of objects.a A concept that in­
cludes a synthesis in it is to be held as empty, and does not relate to any
object, if this synthesis does not belong to experience, either as borrowed
from it, in which case it is an empirical concept, or as one on which, as
a priori condition, experience in general (its form) rests, and then it is a
pure concept, which nevertheless belongs to experience, since its objectb
can be encountered only in the latter. For whence will one derive the
character of the possibility of an object that is thought by means of a syn­
thetic a priori concept, if not from the synthesis that constitutes the form
of the empirical cognition of objects?' That in such a concept no contradiction must be contained is, to be sure, a necessary logical condition; but
it is far from sufficient for the objective reality of the concept, i.e., for the
possibility of such an object as is thought through the concept,79 Thus in
the concept of a figure that is enclosed between two straight lines there is
no contradiction, for the concepts of two straight lines and their intersection contain no negation of a figure; rather the impossibility rests not
on the concept in itself, but on its construction in space, i.e., on the conditions of space and its determinations; but these in turn have their objective reality, i.e., they pertain to possible things, because they contain in
themselves a priori the form of experience in general.
We shall now make obvious the extensive utility and influence of this
postulate of possibility. If I represent to myself a thing that persists, so
that everything that changes merely belongs to its states, I can never
cognize from such a concept alone that such a thing is possible. Or, if
I represent something to myself that is so constituted that if it is
posited something else always and inevitably succeeds it, this may well
be able to be so thought without contradiction; but whether such a
property (as causality) will be encountered in any possible thing cannot thereby be judged. Finally, I can represent various things (substances) to myself that are so constituted that the state of one is
followed by a consequence in the state of the other, and conversely; but
whether such a relation can pertain to any things cannot be derived
from these concepts, which contain a merely arbitrary synthesis. Thus
only from the fact that these concepts express a priori the relations of
the perceptions in every experience does one cognize their objective
reality, i.e., their transcendental truth, and, to be sure, independently
o f experience, but yet not independently o f all relationd to the form of
a

Objecte
Object
, Objecte
d Beziehung
b

323

B 268

A22I

B 269

A222

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 70

A223

B 27!

A224

an experience in general and the synthetic unity in which alone objects
can be empirically cognized.
But if one wanted to make entirely new concepts of substances, of
forces, and of interactions from the material that perception offers us,
without borrowing the example of their connection from experience it­
self, then one would end up with nothing but figments of the brain, for
the possibility of which there would be no indications at all, since in
their case one did not accept experience as instructress nor borrow
these concepts from it. Invented concepts of this sort cannot acquire the
character of their possibility a priori, like the categories, as conditions
on which all experience depends, but only a posteriori, as ones given
through experience itself, and their possibility must either be cognized
a posteriori and empirically or not cognized at all. A substance that was
persistently present in space yet without filling it (like that intermedi­
ate thing between matter and thinking beings, which some would in­
troduce),80 or a special fundamental power of our mind to intuit the
future (not merely, say, to deduce it), or, finally, a faculty of our mind to
stand in a community of thoughts with other men (no matter how distant they may be)81 - these are concepts the possibility o f which is en­
tirely groundless, because it cannot be grounded in experience and its
known laws, and without this it is an arbitrary combination of thoughts
that, although it contains no contradiction, still can make no claim to
objective reality, thus to the possibility of the sort of object that one
would here think. As far as reality is concerned, it is evidently intrinsi­
cally forbidden to think it in concreto without getting help from experi­
ence, because it can only pertain to sensation, as the matter of
experience, and does not concern the form of the relation that one can
always play with in fictions. a
But I leave aside everything the possibility of which can only be de­
rived from actuality in experience, and consider here only the possi­
bility of things through concepts a priori, about which I proceed to
assert that i t can never occur by itself solely from such concepts, but
always only as formal and objective conditions of an experience in
general.
It may look, to be sure, as if the possibility of a triangle could be cog­
nized from its concept in itself (it is certainly independent of experi­
ence); for in fact we can give it an object entirely a priori, i.e., construct
it. But since this is only the form of an object, it would still always remain only a product o f the imagination, the possibility o f whose object
would still remain doubtful, as requiring something more, namely that
such a figure be thought solely under those conditions on which all ob­
jects of experience rest. Now that space is a formal a priori condition of
a

Erdichtungen

3 24

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

outer experiences, that this very same formative a synthesis by means of
which we construct a figure in imagination is entirely identical with that
which we exercise in the apprehension of an appearance in order to
make a concept of experience of it - it is this alone that connects with
this concept the representation of the possibility of such a thing. And
thus the possibility of continuous magnitudes, indeed even of magni­
tudes in general, since the concepts of them are all synthetic, is never
clear from the concepts themselves, but only from them as formal conditions of the determination of objects in experience in general; and
where should one want to seek objects that correspond to the concepts,
if not in the experience through which alone objects are given to
us? - although without anticipating experience itself we can cognize
and characterize the possibility of things solely in relation to the formal
conditions under which something can be determined as an object in
experience at all, thus fully a priori but only in relationb to these conditions and within their boundaries.82
The postulate for cognizing the actuality of things requires perception, thus sensation of which one is conscious - not immediate perception of the object itself the existence of which is to be cognized, but still
its connection with some actual perception in accordance with the
analogies of experience, which exhibit all real connection in an experience in general.
In the mere concept of a thing no characteristic of its existence can
be encountered at all. For even if this concept is so complete that it lacks
nothing required for thinking of a thing with all of its inner detennina­
tions, still existence has nothing in the least to do with all of this, but
only with the question of whether such a thing is given to us in such a
way that the perception of it could in any case precede the concept. For
that the concept precede the perception signifies its mere possibility; but
perception, which yields the material for the concept, i s the sole characteristic of actuality. However, one can also cognize the existence of the
thing prior to the perception of it, and therefore cognize it comparatively a priori, if only it is connectedC with some perceptions in accordance with the principles of their empirical connection d (the analogies).
For in that case the existence of the thing is still connectede with our
perceptions in a possible experience, and with the guidance of the analogies we can get from our actual perceptions to the thing in the series of
possible perceptions. Thus we cognize the existence of a magnetic matbildende
b Beziehung
, zusammenhdngt
d Verkniipfung
hdngt . . . zusammen
a

e

325

B 2 72

A225

B 273

A 22 6

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 274

ter penetrating all bodies from the perception of attracted iron filings,
although an immediate perception of this matter is impossible for us
given the constitution of our organs. For in accordance with the laws of
sensibility and the context of our perceptions we could also happen upon
the immediate empirical intuition of it in an experience if our senses, the
crudeness of which does not affect the form of possible experience in
general, were finer. Thus wherever perception and whatever is appended
to it in accordance with empirical laws reaches, there too reaches our
cognition of the existence of things. If we do not begin with experience,
or proceed in accordance with laws of the empirical connectiona of ap­
pearances, then we are only making a vain display of wanting to discover
or research the existence of any thing. b<However, a powerful objection
against these rules for proving existence mediately is made by idealism,
the refutation of which belongs here.
* * *

Refutation of Idealism8 3

B 2 75

Idealism (I mean material idealism) is the theory that declares the exis­
tence of objects in space outside us to be either merely doubtful and in­
demonstrable, or else false and impossible; the former is the
problematic idealism of Descartes, who declares only one empirical as­
sertion (assertio), namely I am, to be indubitable; the latter is the dog­
matic idealism of Berkeley, who declares space, together with all the
things to which it is attached as an inseparable condition, to be some­
thing that is impossible in itself, and who therefore also declares things
in space to be merely imaginary.84 Dogmatic idealism is unavoidable if
one regards space as a property that is to pertain to the things in them­
selves; for then it, along with everything for which it serves as a condi­
tion, is a non-entity. The ground for this idealism, however, has been
undercut by us in the Transcendental Aesthetic. Problematic idealism,
which does not assert anything about this, but rather professes only our
incapacity for proving an existence outside us from our own by means of
immediate experience, is rational and appropriate for a thorough philo­
sophical manner of thought, allowing, namely, no decisive judgment
until a sufficient proof has been found. The proof that is demanded must
therefore establish that we have experience and not merely imagina­
tion of outer things, which cannot be accomplished unless one can prove
that even our inner experience, undoubted by Descartes, is possible
only under the presupposition of outer experience.
a Zusammenhanges
b

The following sentence, the ensuing "Refutation of Idealism," and its proof and the
subsequent remarks are all added in the second edition (B 2 74-9)'

326

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

Theorem

The mere, but empirically determined, consciousness of my own
existence proves the existence of objects in space outside me.
Proof
I am conscious of my existence as determined in time. All time-deter­
mination presupposes something persistent in perception. This persis­
tent thing, however, cannot be something in me, since my own
existence in time can first be determined only through this persistent
thing.a Thus the perception of this persistent thing is possible only
through a thing outside me and not through the mere representation
of a thing outside me. Consequently, the determination of my existence
in time is possible only by means of the existenceb of actual things that
I perceive outside myself. Now consciousness in time is necessarily
combined with the consciousness of the possibility of this time-deter­
mination: Therefore it is also necessarily combined with the existence
of the things outside me, as the condition of time-determination; i.e.,
the consciousness of my own existence is at the same time an immediate consciousness of the existence of other things outside me.
Note 1 . One will realize that in the preceding proof the game that
idealism plays has with greater justice been turned against it. Idealism
assumed that the only immediate experience is inner experience, and
that from that outer things could only be inferred, but, as in any case
in which one infers from given effects to determinate causes, only un­
reliably, since the cause of the representations that we perhaps falsely
ascribe to outer things can also lie in us. Yet here it is proved that outer
experience is really immediate, * that only by means of it is possible not,
* The immediate consciousness o f the existence o f outer things i s not presupposed but proved in the preceding theorem, whether we have insight into the
possibility of this consciousness or not. The question about the latter would
be whether we have only an inner sense but no outer one, rather merely outer
imagination. But it is clear that in order for us even to imagine something as
external, i.e., to exhibit it to sense in intuition, we must already have an outer
sense, and by this means immediately distinguish the mere receptivity of an
a According to the revised preface (Bxxxix) , this sentence is to be replaced by the follow­

b

ing: "This persistent thing, however, cannot be an intuition in me. For all grounds of de­
termination of my existence that can be encountered in me are representations, and as
such require something persistent that is distinct even from them, in relation to which
their change, thus my existence in the time in which they change, can be determined."

Existenz
, Existenz
327

B 2 76

B 277
B 2 76

B 2 77

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 78

B 2 79

to be sure, the consciousness of our own existence, but its determina­
tion in time, i.e., inner experience. Of course, the representation I am,
which expresses the consciousness that can accompany all thinking, is
that which immediately includes the existencea of a subject in itself, but
not yet any cognition of it, thus not empirical cognition, i.e., experi­
ence; for to that there belongs, besides the thought of something exist­
ing, intuition, and in this case inner intuition, i.e., time, in regard to
which the subject must be determined, for which outer objects are ab­
solutely requisite, so that inner experience itself is consequently only
mediate and possible only through outer experience.85
Note 2. All use of our faculty of cognition in experience for the de­
termination of time agrees with this completely. Not only can we per­
ceiveb all time-determination only through the change in outer relations
(motion) relative to that which persists in space (e.g., the motion of the
sun with regard to the objects on the earth);86 we do not even have any­
thing persistent on which we could base the concept of a substance, as
intuition, except merely matter, and even this persistence is not drawn
from outer experience, but rather presupposed a priori as the necessary
condition of all time-determination, thus also as the determination of
inner sense in regard to our own existence through the existenceC of
outer things. The consciousness of myself in the representation I is no
intuition at all, but a merely intellectual representation of the self­
activity of a thinking subject. And hence this I does not have the least
predicate of intuition that, as persistent, could serve as the correlate for
time-determination in inner sense, as, say, impenetrability in matter, as
empirical intuition, does.87
Note 3. From the fact that the existenced of outer objects is required
for the possibility of a determinate consciousness of our self it does not
follow that every intuitive representation of outer things includes at the
same time their existence, for that may well be the mere effect of the
imagination (in dreams as well as in delusions); but this is possible
merely through the reproduction of previous outer perceptions, which,
as has been shown, are possible only through the actuality of outer ob­
jects. Here it had to be proved only that inner experience in general is
possible only through outer experience in general. Whether this or that
outer intuition from the spontaneity that characterizes every imagining. For
even merely to imagine an outer sense would itself annihilate the faculty of
intuition, which is to be determined through the imagination.
a

Existenz

b Following Erdmann, reading "wahrnehmen" instead of "vornehmen. "

, Existenz
d Existenz here and in the remainder of this sentence.
328

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

putative experience is not mere imagination must be ascertained ac­
cording to its particular determinations and through its coherence with
the criteria of all actual experience.

aFinally, as far as the third postulate is concerned, it pertains to material
necessity in existence, not the merely formal and logical necessity in the
connection of concepts.88 Now since no existenceb of objects of the
senses can be cognized fully a priori, but always only comparatively a priori relative to another already given existence, but since nevertheless
even then we can only arrive at an existence that must b e contained
somewhere in the nexus of experience of which the given perception is
a part, the necessity of existenced can thus never be cognized from concepts but rather always only from the connection with that which is perceived, in accordance with general laws of experience. Now there is no
existence that could be cognized as necessary under the condition of
other given appearances except the existence of effects from given
causes in accordance with laws of causality. Thus it is not the existence
of things (substances) but of their state of which alone we can cognize
the necessity, and moreover only from other states, which are given in
perception, in accordance with empirical laws of causality. From this it
follows that the criterion of necessity lies solely in the law of possible ex­
perience that everything that happens is determined a priori through its
cause in appearance. Hence we cognize only the necessity of effects in
nature, the causes of which are given to us, and the mark of necessity in
existence does not reach beyond the field of possible experience, and
even in this it does not hold of the existence' of things, as substances,
since these can never be regarded as empirical effects, or as something
that happens and arises. Necessity therefore concerns only the relations
of appearances in accordance with the dynamical law of causality, and
the possibility grounded upon it o f inferring a priori from some given
existence (a cause) to another existence (the effect). Everything that happens is hypothetically necessary; that is a principle that subjects alteration in the world to a law, i.e., a rule of necessary existence, without
which not even nature itself would obtain. Hence the proposition
"Nothing happens through a mere accident" (in mundo non datur casus)!

a The text common to the two editions resumes here.

b

Existenz
, Existenz
d Existenz
, Existenz

f In the world there is no chance.

329

A 2 26

A227

B 280

A228

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 81

A 2 29

B 282

A 2 30

is an a priori law of nature; likewise the proposition "No necessity in na­
ture is blind, but is rather conditioned, consequently comprehensible
necessity" (non datur fatum).a Both are laws of the sort through which
the play of alterations is subjected to a nature of things (as appear­
ances), or, what is the same thing, to the unity of the understanding, in
which alone they can belong to an experience, as the synthetic unity of
appearances. Both of these belong to the dynamical principles. The first
is properly a consequence of the principle of causality (under the analo­
gies of experience). The second belongs to the principles of modality,
which adds to the causal determination the concept of necessity, which,
however, stands under a rule of understanding. The principle of conti­
nuity forbade any leap in the series of appearances (alterations) (in
mundo non datur saltus),b but also any gap or cleft between two appear­
ances in the sum of all empirical intuitions in space (non datur hiatus);C
for one can express the proposition thus: "Nothing can enter experience
that proves a vacuumd or even permits it as a part of empirical synthe­
sis." For as far as concerns the void that one might think of outside of
the field of possible experience (the world), this does not belong to the
jurisdiction of the mere understanding, which only decides about ques­
tions concerning the use of given appearances for empirical cognition,
and it is a problem for ideal reason, which goes beyond the sphere of a
possible experience and would judge about what surrounds and bounds
this, and must therefore be considered in the transcendental dialectic.
We could easily represent the order of these four propositions (in mundo
non datur hiatus, non datur saltus, non datur casus, non daturfatum)' in ac­
cordance with the order of the categories, just like all principles of tran­
scendental origin, and show each its position, but the already practiced
reader will do this for himself or easily discover the clue to it. However,
they are all united simply in this, that they do not permit anything in
empirical synthesis that could violate or infringe the understanding and
the continuous connectiOIv of all appearances, i.e., the unity of its concepts. For it is in this alone that the unity of experience, in which all
perceptions must have their place, is possible.
Whether the field of possibility is greater than the field that contains
everything actual, and whether the latter is in turn greater than the setg
of that which is necessary, are proper questions, and can, to be sure, be
There is no fate.
In the world there is no leap.
, There is no hiatus.
d Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "The vacuum physicum is different from the
vacuum metaphysicum, in which there is no effect at all." (E XCVII, p. 36; 2 3 :33)
, In the world there is no hiatus, there is no leap, there is no chance, there is no fate.

n

b

f Zusammenhange
g

Menge
3 30

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

solved synthetically, though they also fall under the jurisdiction of rea­
son alone; for they mean, roughly, to ask whether all things, as appear­
ances, belong together in the sum total and the context of a single
experience, of which each given perception is a part which therefore
could not be combined with any other appearances, or whether my perceptions could belong to more than one possible experience (in their
general connection).a The understanding gives a priori to experience in
general only the rule, in accordance with the subjective and formal conditions of sensibility as well as of apperception, which alone make it
possible. Even were they possible, we could still not conceive of and
make comprehensible other forms of intuition (than space and time) or
other forms of understanding (than the discursive form of thinking, or
that of cognition through concepts); and even if we could, they would
still not belong to experience, as the sole cognition in which objects are
given to us. Whether other perceptions than those which in general belong to our entire possible experience and therefore an entirely different field of matter can obtain cannot be decided by the understanding,
which has to do only with the synthesis of that which is given.
Otherwise the poverty of our usual inferences through which we bring
forth a great realm of possibility, of which everything actual (every object of experience) is only a small part, is very obvious. "Everything actual is possible" - from this there follows naturally, in accordance with
the logical rules of conversion, the merely particular proposition,
"Something possible is actual," which then seems to mean as much as
"Much is possible that is not actual." It certainly looks as if one could
increase the number of that which is possible beyond that of the actual,
since something must be added to the former to constitute the latter.
But I do not acknowledge this addition to the possible. For that which
would have to be added to the possible would be impossible. All that
can be added to my understanding is something beyond agreement with
the formal conditions of experience, namely connection with some perception or other; but whatever is connected with this in accordance
with empirical laws is actual, even if it is not immediately perceived.
However, that another series of appearances in thoroughgoing connection with that which is given to me in perception, thus more than a single all-encompassing experience, is possible, cannot be inferred from
that which is given, and even less without anything being given at all;
for without matterb nothing at all can be thought. That which is possible only under conditions that are themselves merely possible is not
possible in all respects. But this is the way the question is taken when
Zusammenhange
b Stoff, i.e., matter as contrasted to form, rather than matter in a specifically physical

a

sense.

331

B 283

A23 I

B 284

A 2 32

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 285

A2 33

B 286

A 2 34

one wants to know whether the possibility of things extends further
than experience can reach.89
I have only mentioned these questions in order not to leave a gap in
what according to common opinion belongs among the concepts of the
understanding. In fact, however, absolute possibility (which is valid in
every respect) is no mere concept of the understanding, and can in no
way be of empirical use, rather it belongs solely to reason, which goes
beyond all possible empirical use of the understanding. Hence we have
had to satisfy ourselves here with a merely critical remark, but other­
wise left the matter in obscurity pending further treatment later on.
Since I would now conclude this fourth section, and with it at the
same time the system of all principles of the pure understanding, I must
still provide the reasona why I have called the principles b of modality
"postulates." I will not here take this expression in the significance that,
contrary to the usage' of mathematics, to whom it nevertheless properly
belongs, some recent philosophical writers90 have used it, namely that
postulation means the same as putting a proposition forth as immedi­
ately certain without justification or proof; for if we were to allow that
synthetic propositions, no matter how evident they might be, could
claim unconditional acceptance without any deduction, merely on their
own claim, then all critique of the understanding would be lost, and,
since there is no lack of audacious pretensions that common belief does
not refuse (which is, however, no credential),d our understanding would
therefore be open to every delusion, without being able to deny its ap­
proval to those claims that, though unjustifable, demand to be admitted
as actual axioms in the very same confident tone. When, therefore, a
determination is added a priori to the concept of a thing, then for such
a proposition if not a proof then at least a deduction of the legitimacy
of its assertion must unfailingly be supplied.
The principles of modality are not, however, objective-synthetic, since
the predicates of possibility, actuality, and necessity do not in the least
augment the concept of which they are asserted in such a way as to add
something to the representation of the object. But since they are nevertheless always synthetic, they are so only subjectively, i.e., they add to the
concept of a thing (the real), about which they do not otherwise say any­
thing, the cognitive power whence it arises and has its seat, so that, if it
is merely connected in the understanding with the formal conditions of
experience, its object is called possible; if it is in connectione with perGrund
Principien
Sinn
d Kreditiv
, Beziehung
a

b

c'

332

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

ception (sensation, as the matter of the senses), and through this deter­
mined by means of the understanding, then the objecta is actual; and if
it is determined through the connectionb of perceptions in accordance
with concepts, then the object is called necessary. The principles of
modality therefore do not assert of a concept anything other than the ac­
tion of the cognitive faculty through which it is generated. Now in
mathematics a postulate is the practical proposition that contains noth­
ing except the synthesis through which we first give ourselves an object
and generate its concept, e.g., to describe a circle with a given line from
a given point on a plane; and a proposition of this sort cannot be proved,
since the procedure that it demands is precisely that through which we
first generate the concept of such a figure. Accordingly we can postulate
the principles of modality with the very same right, since they do not
augment* their concept of things in general, but rather only indicate the
way in which in general it is combined with the cognitive power.'
* * *
* Through the actuality of a thing I certainly posit more than possibility, but

not in the thing; for that can never contain more in actuality than what was
contained in its complete possibility. But while possibility was merely a posit­
ingd of a thing in relatione to the understanding (to its empirical use), actual­
ity is at the same time its connection with perception.
e

Zusammenhange

a Object
b Zusammenhang

, The following series of notes is inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition at A 2 34-5,
presumably constituting notes made for the "General Remark" that he adds at this point
in the second edition:
"Now comes the proposition: how are synthetic a priori propositions possible." ( E
XCVIII, p . 37; 2 3 = 3 3)
"Finally: How are synthetic a priori propositions possible through concepts, how are
they possible through the construction of concepts?" (E XCIX, p. 37; 2 3 :33)
"On the possibility of an ars characteristica vel combinatoria." (E C, p. 37; 2 3 : 3 3)
"It is remarkable that for these postulates we must always have a mechanical
medium[:] either a model as a string that lies, or the motion of this string around a
point." (E CI, p. 3 7; 2 3 =3 3)
"That all principles and synthetic a priori propositions in general do not go further
than objects of experience, and that if we would still go beyond them then no intuition
can correspond to them." (E CII, p. 38; 2 3 : 3 3-4)
"That the pure laws of understanding also teach nothing further than the laws under
which alone experience in general is possible, not the particular laws of the objects of
experience. But that the laws of appearances (which are merely in us) thus have their
seat and origin in the understanding, therefore also in us, is not to be marveled at.
Indeed it is not possible to cognize a law with its necessity in such a way that we could
have cognized it otherwise than in our own understanding. The chemical laws are not
laws so much as rules of nature." (E CIII, p. 38; 2 3 : 3 4)
d
e

Position
Beziehung
333

A235

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 288

B 2 89

a<General Note on the System of Principles
It is very remarkable that we cannot have insight into the possibility of
any thing in accordance with the mere categories, but we must always
have available an intuition in order for it to display the objective reality
of the pure concept of the understanding. Take, e.g., the categories of
relation.b How I) something can exist only as subject, not as mere de­
termination of other things, i.e., can be substance; or how 2) because
something is, something else must be, thus how something can be a
cause at all; or 3) how, if several things exist, from the existence of one
of them something about the others follows and vice versa, and in this
way a community of substances can obtain - insight into these cannot
be had from mere concepts at all. The same thing also holds of the
other categories, e.g., how a thing can be one with a number of others
taken together, i.e., be a magnitude, etc. Thus as long as intuition is
lacking, one does not know whether one thinks an object:" through the
categories, and whether there can ever be any object that even fits
them; and so it is confirmed that the categories are not by themselves
cognitions, but mere fonns of thought for making cognitions out of
given intuitions. - In the same way it follows that no synthetic proposi­
tion can be made out of mere categories - e.g., in all existence there is
substance, i.e., something that can exist only as subject and never as
mere predicate; or, everything is a quantum, etc. - if there is nothing
that we can use in order to go beyond a given concept and thereby con­
nect it with another. Hence also no one has ever succeeded in proving
a synthetic proposition merely from pure concepts of the understand­
ing, e.g., the proposition "Every contingently existing thing has a
cause." One could never get further than to prove that without this re­
latione we could not comprehend the existence! of the contingent at
all, i.e., cognize the existence of such a thing a priori through the un­
derstanding; from which, however, it does not follow that this is also the
condition of the possibility of things themselves. Hence if one will look
back on our proof of the principle of causality, one will become aware
that we could prove it only of objectsg of possible experience:
"Everything that happens (every occurrence) presupposes a cause"; and
indeed we could prove it only as a principleh of the possibility of expea This note was added in its entirety in the second edition.
b Relation
, Object
d Object
, Beziehung
f Existenz, here and in the next clause.
g Objecten
h Princip
3 34

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

rience, hence of the cognition of an objecta given in empirical intuition, and not from mere concepts. That the proposition "Everything
contingent must have a cause" may be evident to everyone from mere
concepts is not to be denied; but then the concept of the contingent is
already taken in such a way that it contains, not the category of modality (as something, the non-existence of which can be thought), but that
of relationb (as something that can only exist as the consequence of
something else), and then it is, of course, an identical proposition:
"V\1hat can only exist as a consequence has its cause." In fact, when we
are to give examples of contingent existence, we always appeal to alterations and not merely to the possibility of the thought of the oppo­
site.*,91 Alteration, however, is an occurrence that is possible as such
only through a cause, the non-being o f which i s thus possible in itself;
and thus one cognizes contingency from the fact that something can
exist only as the effect of a cause; thus if a thing is assumed to be con­
tingent, it's an analytic proposition to say that it has a cause.
It is even more remarkable, however, that in order to understand the
possibility of things in accordance with the categories, and thus to es­
tablish the objective reality of the latter, we do not merely need intu­
itions, but always outer intuitions. If we take, e.g., the pure concept of
relation,c we find that I) in order to give something that persists in in­
tuition, corresponding to the concept of substance (and thereby to es­
tablish the objective reality of this concept), we need an intuition in
space (of matter), since space alone persistently determines, while time,
however, and thus everything that is in inner sense, constantly flows. 2)
In order to exhibit alteration as the intuition corresponding to the con­
cept of causality, we must take motion, as alteration in space, as our ex­
ample, indeed only by that means can we make alterations, the
possibility of which cannot be comprehended by any pure understand-

* One can easily think of the not-being of matter, but the ancients did not infer
its contingency from that. And even the change from the being to the nonbeing of a given state of a thing, in which all alteration consists, does not prove
the contingency of this state at all, as it were, from the actuality of its opposite; e.g., the rest of the body that follows its motion still does not prove the
contingency of its motion just because the former is the opposite of the latter.
For this opposite is here opposed to the other only logically, not realiter. In
order to prove the contingency of the motion of the body, one would have to
prove that instead of the motion in the preceding point of time, the body
could have been at rest then, not that it rests later; for in the later case the
two opposites are perfectly consistent.
" Objects
b Relation
Relation
C

335

B 290

B 29 I

B 290

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 292

B 293

ing, intuitable. Alteration is the combination of contradictorily opposed
determinations in the existence of one and the same thing. Now how it
is possible that from a given state an opposed state of the same thing
should follow not only cannot be made comprehensible by reason with­
out an example, but cannot even be made understandable without intu­
ition, and this intuition is the motion of a point in space, the existence
of which in different places (as a sequence of opposed determinations)
first makes alteration intuitable to us; for in order subsequently to make
even inner alterations thinkable, we must be able to grasp time, as the
form of inner sense, figuratively through a line, and grasp the inner al­
teration through the drawing of this line (motion), and thus grasp the
successive existencea of ourself in different states through outer intu­
ition; the real ground of which is that all alteration presupposes some­
thing that persists in intuition, even in order merely to be perceived as
alteration, but there is no persistent intuition to be found in inner
sense. - Finally, the possibility of the category of community is not to
be comprehended at all through mere reason, and thus it is not possi­
ble to have insight into the objective reality of this concept without
intuition, and indeed outer intuition in space. For how would one con­
ceiveb the possibility that if several substances exist, the existence' of the
one can follow reciprocally from the existence of the other (as an ef­
fect), and thus that because there is something in the former, there must
on that account also be something in the other that cannot be under­
stood from the existence of the latter alone? For this is requisite for
community, but is not even comprehensible among things each of
which is entirely isolated from the others through its subsistence.
Hence Leibniz, who ascribed a community to the substances of the
world only as conceived by the understanding alone, needed a divinity
for mediation; for from their existence alone this community rightly
seemed to him incomprehensible.92 But we can readily grasp the possi­
bility of community (of substances as appearances) if we represent them
in space, thus in outer intuition. For this already contains in itself a pri­
ori formal outer relations as conditions of the possibility of the real (in
effect and countereffect, thus in community). - It can just as easily be
established that the possibility of things as magnitudes, and thus the
objective reality of the category of magnitude, can also be exhibited
only in outer intuition, and that by means of that alone can it subse­
quently also be applied to inner sense. But in order to avoid being long­
winded I must leave the examples of this to the reader's further thought.
This entire remark is of great importance, not only in order to conExistenz
denken
, Existenz, used throughout this sentence.
a

b

336

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

firm our preceding refutation of idealism, but, even more, when we
come to talk of self-cognition from mere inner consciousness and
the determination of our nature without the assistance of outer empirical intuitions, to indicate to us the limits of the possibility of such
a cognition.93
The final conclusion of this entire section is thus: All principles of the
pure understanding are nothing further than a priori principles a of the
possibility of experience, and all synthetic a priori propositions are re­
lated to the latter alone, indeed their possibility itself rests entirely on
this relation.>b
n

b

Principien
Beziehung

337

B 2 94
