
3·
<Analogies of Experience.>c,67

[In the first edition:]

Their general principle is: As regards their existence, all
appearances stand a priori under rules of the determination
of their relation to each other in one time.

[In the second edition:]

<Their principled is: Experience is possible only through the
representation of a necessary connection of perceptions.>

e<proof
Experience is an empirical cognition, i.e., a cognition that detennines an
object! through perceptions. It is therefore a synthesis of perceptions,
a Following Erdmann, reading "a posteriori" instead of "a priori. "
b

Quantitiit

, In the first edition: "The Analogies of Experience."

d

Princip

, The heading "Proof" and the following paragraph were added in the second edition

.

f Object

295

A I 76

B2 18

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2 19

A I77

B 220

which is not itself contained in perception but contains the synthetic
unity of the manifold of perception in one consciousness, which consti­
tutes what is essential in a cognition of objects a of the senses, i.e., of experience (not merely of the intuition or sensation of the senses). Now in
experience, to be sure, perceptions come together only contingently, so
that no necessity of their connection is or can become evident in the per­
ceptions themselves, since apprehension is only a juxtapositionb of the
manifold of empirical intuition, but no representation of the necessity of
the combined existence of the appearances that it juxtaposes in space and
time is to be encountered in it. But since experience is a cognition of ob­
jectsC through perception, consequently the relationd in the existence of
the manifold is to be represented in it not as it is juxtaposed in time but
as it is objectively in time, yet since time itself cannot be perceived, the
determination of the existence of objectse in time can only come about
through their combination in time in general, hence only through a pri­
ori connecting concepts. Now since these always carry necessity along
with them, experience is thus possible only through a representation of
the necessary connection of the perceptions.>
fThe three modi o f time are persistence, succession, and simultaneity. Hence three rules of all temporal relations of appearances, in accor­
dance with which the existenceg of each can be determined with regard
to the unity of all time, precede all experience and first make it possible.
The general principle of all three analogies rests on the necessary
unity of apperception with regard to all possible empirical conscious­
ness (of perception) at every time, consequently, since that is an a pri­
ori ground, it rests on the synthetic unity of all appearances according
to their relations in time. For the original apperception is related to
inner sense (the sum of all representations), and indeed related a priori
a

Objecte

b Zusammenstellung

, Objecte

d Throughout this section of the work,

"relation" will translate. Verba/tnis unless other­

wise noted.

, Objecte

f The text common to the two editions resumes here, although in his copy of the first edi­

tion Kant had struck out the next two paragraphs and instead written the following two
notes:
"For the proposition that I myself am simultaneous with all time in me so far as I
think it, i.e., with the whole time that I think, or its form, would be tautologous." (E
LXXIv, p. 3 I ; 2 3 :29)
"The principle of persistence does not concern things in themselves, hence the sub­
ject of the representations of things as itself, i.e., apperception, but only appearances.
For the concept of time does not apply to anything else, not even to the subject. of time
itself." (E Lxxv, p. 3 1; 2 3 :29)
g In Kant's copy of the first edition, "existence" is replaced with "the relation [Verhaltnis]
of the real in appearance" (E LXXVI, p. 3 1 ; 2 3:47).

296

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

to its form, i.e., the relation of the manifold empirical consciousness in
time. Now in the original apperception all of this manifold, so far as its
temporal relations are concerned, is to be unified; for this is what its
transcendental unity, under which everything stands that is to belong to
my (i.e., my united)a cognition, and thus can become an object for me,
asserts a priori. This synthetic unity in the temporal relation of all per­
ceptions, which is detennined a priori, is thus the law that all empirical time-determinations must stand under rules of general time­
determination, and the analogies of experience, with which we will now
deal, must be rules of this sort.
These principles have the peculiarity that they do not concern the
appearances and the synthesis of their empirical intuition, but merely
their existence and their relation to one another with regard to this
their existence. Now the way in which something is apprehended in appearance can be determined a priori so that the rule of its synthesis at
the same time yields this intuition a priori in every empirical example,
i.e., can bring the former about from the latter. Yet the existence of ap­
pearances cannot be cognized a priori, and even if we could succeed on
this path in inferring to some existence or other, we still would not be
able to cognize it determinately, i.e., be able to anticipate that through
which its empirical intuition is differentiated from others.
The preceding two principles, which I named the mathematical ones
in consideration of the fact that they justified applying mathematics to
appearances, pertained to appearances with regard to their mere possi­
bility, and taught how both their intuition and the real in their percep­
tion could be generated in accordance with rules of a mathematical syn­
thesis, hence how in both cases numerical magnitudes and, with them,
the determination of the appearance as magnitude, could be used. E.g.,
I would be able to compose and determine a priori, i.e., construct the degree of the sensation of sunlight out of about 200,000 illuminations from
the moon. Thus we can call the former principles constitutive.
Things must be entirely different with those principles that are to
bring the existence of appearances under rules a pr·iori. For, since this existence cannot be constructed, these principles can concern only the relationb of existence, and can yield nothing but merely regulative principles.c Here therefore neither axioms nor intuitions are to be thought of;
rather, if a perception is given to us in a temporal relation to others (even
though indeterminate), it cannot be said a priori which and how great
this other perception is, but only how it is necessarily combined with the
first, as regards its existence, in this modus of time. In philosophy analogies signify something very different from what they represent in matheeinigen
Verhdltnis
, Principien
a

b

297

A 1 78

B 221

A I 79

B 22 2

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A l80

B 223

A 181

B 2 24

matics. In the latter they are formulas that assert the identity of two rela­
tions of magnitude,a and are always constitutive, so that if two members
of the proportion are given the third is also thereby given, i.e., can be
constructed. In philosophy, however, analogy is not the identity of two
quantitative but of two qualitative relations, where from three given
members I can cognize and give a priori only the relation to a fourth
member but not this fourth member itself, although I have a rule for
seeking it in experience and a mark for discovering it there. An analogy
of experience will therefore be only a rule in accordance with which unity
of experience is to arise from perceptions (not as a perception itself, as
empirical intuition in general), and as a principle it will not be valid of the
objects (of the appearances) constitutively but merely regulatively.68
The very same thing will also hold for the postulates o f empirical think­
ing in general, which together concern the synthesis of mere intuition (of
the form of appearance), of perception (of its matter), and of experience
(of the relation of these perceptions), namely that they are only regula­
tive principles, and that they differ from the mathematical principles,
which are constitutive, not, to be sure, in their certainty, which is estab­
lished a priori in both cases, but yet in the manner of their evidence, i.e.,
with regard to their intuitiveness (thus also their demonstration).
But what must be remembered about all synthetic principles and es­
pecially noted here is this: that these analogies have their sole signifi­
cance and validity not as principles of the transcendental use of the
understanding but merely as principles of its empirical use, hence they
can b e proven only as such; consequently the appearances must not be
subsumed under the categories per se, but only under their schemata.
For if the objects to which these principles were to be related were things
in themselves, then it would be entirely impossible to cognize anything
about them synthetically a priori. Now it is nothing but appearances
whose complete cognition, to which in the end all a priori principles must
come down to, is only possible experience, and consequently those prin­
ciples can have as their goal nothing but the conditions of the unity of
empirical cognition in the synthesis of the appearances; but these condi­
tions are thought only in the schema of the pure concept of the under­
standing, and the category contains the function, unrestricted by any
sensible condition, of their unity, as of a synthesis in general. These prin­
ciples, therefore, justify us in compounding the appearances only in ac­
cord with an analogy with the logical and general unity of concepts, and
hence in the principle itself we make use of the category, but in its exe­
cution (its application to appearances) we set its schema in its place, as
the key to its use, or rather we set the latter alongside the former, as its
restricting condition, under the name of its formula.
a

GrojJenverbaltnisse

298

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

A.
First Analogy.
Principle of the persistence <of substance.>a,69

[In the first edition:]
All appearances contain that which persists (substance) as
the object itself, and that which can changeb as its mere de­
termination, i.e., a way in which the object exists.c
[In the second edition:]

<In all change of appearances substance persists, and its

quantum is neither increased nor diminished in nature.>
d<Proof
a tkr Substanz added in the second edition.
b

das T¥andelbare

, The following series of notes is entered at the beginning of the "First Analogy" in
Kant's copy of the first edition:
"Here it must be shown that this proposition does not pertain to any other substances
than those whose alteration is effected only through moving causes, and also consists
only in movement, consequently in alteration of relations [Relationen]." (E LXXVII, p.
3 1; 2 3:30)
"All arising and perishing is only the alteration of that which endures (the sub­
stance), and this does not arise and perish (thus the world also does not)." (E LXXVIII,
p. 3 2 ; 2 3 :30)
"Change can only be perceived through that which persists and its alteration. For
the difference of the times in which things are can only be perceived in them as parts of
one and the same time. All change is only the division of time. Hence there must be
something that exists throughout the entire time, since the whole is always the ground
of the division. Hence substance is the substratum, and that which is changing is only
the way in which this exists." (E LXXIX, P.32; 2 3 :30)
"Here the proof must be so conducted that it applies only to substances as phe­
nomena of outer sense, consequently from space, which exists at all time along with its
determination.
"In space all alteration is movement; for if there were something else in the relations
[Relationen], then in accordance with the concept of alteration the subject would persist.
Therefore everything in space would have to disappear at the same time." (E LXXX, p.
3 2 ; 2 3:30)
"If the substance persists, while the accidents change, but the substance, if all acciden­
tia are taken away, is the empty substantiale, then what is it that persists? Now everything
that can be distinguished from that which changes in experience is quantity !grosse], and
this can only be assessed through the magnitude of the merely relative effect in the case
of equal external relations [Relationen] and therefore applies only to bodies." (E LXXXI ,
p. 3 2 ; 2 3 :30-1)
"Here alterations must be discussed." (E LXXXII, p. 32; 2 3 :3 I)
d The heading "Proof' and the following first paragraph in the second edition replace the
heading "Proof of this first Analogy" and this opening paragraph in the first edition:
"All appearances are in time. This can determine the relation [Verhdltnis] in their ex­
istence in two ways, insofar as they exist either successively or simultaneously. In the
case of the fonner time is considered as temporal series, with regard to the latter as tem­

poral domain.

2 99

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 225

A 182

B 226
A 183

All appearances are in time, in which, as substratum (as persistent form
of inner intuition), both simultaneity as well as succession can alone
be represented. The time, therefore, in which all change of appearances
is to b e thought, lasts and does not change; since i t is that in which suc­
cession or simultaneity can be represented only as determinations of it.
Now time cannot be perceived by itself. a Consequently it is in the ob­
jects of perception, i.e., the appearances, that the substratum must be
encountered that represents time in general and in which all change or
simultaneity can be perceived in apprehension through the relation of
the appearances to it. However, the substratum 'bf everything real, i.e.,
everything that belongs to the existenceb of things, is substance, of
which everything that belongs to existence can be thought only as a de­
termination. Consequently that which persists, in relation to which
alone all temporal relations of appearances can be determined, is sub­
stance in the appearance, i.e., the real in the appearance, which as the
substratum of all change always remains the same. Since this, therefore,
cannot change in existence, its quantum in nature can also be neither
increased nor diminished.>
Our apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always successive, and is therefore always changing. We can therefore never deter­
mine from this alone whether this manifold, as object of experience, is
simultaneous or successive, if something does not ground it which al­
ways exists, i.e., something lasting and persisting, of which all change
and simultaneity are nothing but so many ways (modi of time) in which
that which persists exists. Only in that which persists, therefore, are
temporal relations possible (for simultaneity and succession are the only
relations in time), i.e., that which persists i s the substratum o f the em­
pirical representation of time itself, by which alone all time-determina­
tion is possible. Persistence gives general expression to time as the
constant correlate of all existence of appearances, all change and all ac­
companiment.' For change does not affect time itself, but only the ap­
pearances in time (just as simultaneity is not a modus for time itself, in
which no parts are simultaneous but rather all succeed one another). If
one were to ascribe such a succession to time itself, one would have to
think yet another time in which this succession would be possible. d

a for sich
b &iste7ZZ

, Begleitung, here connoting the accompaniment of one state of affairs by another, i.e.,
what Kant is here otherwise calling "simultaneity" or coexistence.

d The following notes are added here in Kant's copy of the first edition:

"The perception of endurance is not possible through the perception of successive
determinations and of the relation of their series to time, thus also not through the rela­
tion to another sequence of determinations, which itself requires a temporal space, but

3 00

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

Only through that which persists does existence in different parts of
the temporal series acquire a magnitude, which one calls duration.
For in mere sequence alone existence is always disappearing and beginning, and never has the least magnitude. Without that which persists
there is therefore no temporal relation. Now time cannot be perceived
in itself; thus this persisting thing in the appearances is the substratum
of all time-determination, consequently also the condition of the possibility of all synthetic unity of perceptions, i.e., of experience, and in this
persisting thing all existence and all change in time can only be regarded as a modus of the existencea of that which lasts and persists.
Therefore in all appearances that which persists is the object itself, i.e.,
the substance (phaenomenon), but everything that changes or that can
change belongs only to the way in which this substance or substances
exists, thus to their determinations.
I find that at all times not merely the philosopher but even the com­
mon understanding has presupposed this persistence as a substratum of
all change in the appearances, and has also always accepted it as indu­
bitable, only the philosopher expresses himself somewhat more deter­
minately in saying that in all alterations in the world the substance
remains and only the accidents change. But I nowhere find even the at­
tempt at a proof of this so obviously synthetic proposition, indeed it
only rarely stands, as it deserves to, at the head of the pure and com­
pletely a priori laws of nature. In fact the proposition that substance per­
sists is tautological. For only this persistence is the ground for our
application of the category of substance to appearance, and one should
have proved that in all appearances there is something that persists, of
which that which changesb is nothing but the determination of its exis­
tence. But since such a proof can never be conducted dogmatically, i.e.,
from concepts, because it concerns a synthetic a priori proposition, and
i t was never considered that such propositions are valid only in relation'
to possible experience, hence that they can be proved only through a
through something whose existence is not a series of successions, but which includes
these in itself as its determinations, consequently per durabilitatem [through the dura­
bility] of substance.
"This proof, like all synthetic ones, is proved only from the possibility of perception.
It is valid where I cannot perceive substance outside of its alterations; but where I can­
not perceive it except through these alterations themselves, it is not valid, and I can es­
timate its endurance and in general the time of its alteration only through outer things,
as I, since I think, think my own existence; my persistence is therefore not proved." ( E
LXXX III, pp. 32-3; 2 3 : 3 r )
"No quantum o f substance is possible in the soul. Hence also nothing that one could
determine through any predicate and call persistent." (E Lxxxrv, P.3 2 ; 23;3 r)
a

Existenz

b das Wandelbare

, Beziehung
301

B 227

A 1 84

B228

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II
A 1 85

B 229
A I 86

B 2 30
A I8 7

deduction of the possibility of the latter, it is no wonder that it has, to
be sure, grounded all experience (for one feels the need for it in empir­
ical cognition), but has never been proved.
A philosopher was asked: How much does the smoke weigh? He
replied: If you take away from the weight of the wood that was burnt
the weight of the ashes that are left over, you will have the weight of the
smoke. He thus assumed as incontrovertible that even in fire the mat­
ter (substance) never disappears but rather only suffers an alteration in
its form.a Likewise the proposition "Nothing comes from nothing" is
only another consequence of the principle of persistence, or rather of
the everlasting existence of the proper subject in the appearances. For
if that in the appearance which one would call substance is to be the
proper substratum of all time-determination, then all existence in the
past as well as in future time must be able to be determined in it and it
alone. Hence we can grant an appearance the name of substance only if
we presuppose its existence at all time, which is not even perfectly ex­
pressed through the word "persistence" since this pertains more to future time. Nevertheless the inner necessity o f persisting is inseparably
connected with the necessity of always having existed, and the expression may therefore stand. Gigni de nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse reverti, b
are two propositions which the ancients connected inseparably, and
which are now sometimes separated only out of misunderstanding, be­
cause one imagines that they pertain to things in themselves, and that
the former would be opposed to the dependence of the world on a
supreme cause (even as far as its substance is concerned); but this worry
is unnecessary, for here the issue is only appearances in the field of ex­
perience, the unity of which would never be possible if we were to allow
new things (as far as their substance is concerned) to arise. For then
everything would disappear that alone can represent the unity of time,
namely the identity of the substratum in which alone all change has its
thoroughgoing unity. This persistence is therefore nothing more than
the way in which we represent the existence of things (in appearance).
The determinations of a substance that are nothing other than partic­
ular ways for it to exist are called accidents. They are always real, since
they concern the existence of the substance (negations are merely deter­
minations that express the non-being of something in the substance).
Now if one ascribes a particular existence to this real in substance (e.g.,
motion, as an accident of matter), then this existence is called "inher­
ence," in contrast to the existence of the substance, which is called "sub­
sistence." Yet many misinterpretations arise from this, and it i s more
Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "\iVhence does he know this? Not from ex­
perience." (E LXXXV; p. 3 4; 2 3:4 7)
b Nothing comes out of nothing, and nothing can revert into nothing.

a

3 02

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

precise and correct if one characterizes the accident only through the
way in which the existence of a substance is positively determinedJo
Nevertheless, thanks to the conditions of the logical use of our under­
standing, it is still unavoidable for us to abstract out, as it were, that
which can change in the existence of a substance while the substance re­
mains, and to consider it in relation to what is really persistent and fun­
damental;a thus this category also stands under the title of relations, but
more as their condition than as itself containing a relation.
Now on this persistence there is also grounded a correction of the
concept of alteration. Arising and perishing are not alterations of that
which arises or perishes. Alteration is a way of existing that succeeds an­
other way of existing of the very same object. Hence everything that is
altered is lasting, and only its state changes.?' Thus since this change
concerns only the determinations that can cease or begin, we can say, in
an expression that seems somewhat paradoxical, that only what persists
(the substance) is altered, while that which is changeableb does not suffer any alteration but rather a change, since some determinations cease
and others begin.
Alteration can therefore be perceived only in substances, and arising
or perishing per se cannot be a possible perception unless it concerns
merely a determination of that which persists, for it is this very thing
that persists that makes possible the representation of the transition
from one state into another, and from non-being into being, which can
therefore be empirically cognized only as changing determinations of
that which lastsY If you assume that something simply began to be,
then you would have to have a point of time in which it did not exist.
But what would you attach this to, if not to that which already exists?
For an empty time that would precede is not an object of perception;
but if you connect this origination to things that existed antecedently
and which endure until that which arises, then the latter would be only
a determination of the former, as that which persists. It is just the same
with perishing: for this presupposes the empirical representation of a
time at which there is no longer an appearance.
Substances (in appearance) are the substrata of all time-determinations. The arising of some of them and the perishing of others would
itself remove the sole condition of the empirical unity of time, and the
appearances would then be related to two different times, in which existence flowed side by side, which is absurd. For there is only one time,
in which all different times must not be placed simultaneously but only
one after another.
Persistence is accordingly a necessary condition under which alone
a das eigentliche Beharrliche und Radikale
das Wandelbare

b

303

B231
A 188

B232
A 189

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

appearances, as things or objects, are determinable in a possible experi­
ence. As to the empirical criterion of this necessary persistence and with
it of the substantiality of appearances, however, what follows will give
us the opportunity to note what is necessary.73
B.

Second Analogy.
<Principle of temporal sequence according to the law
of causality.>a,74

[In the first edition:]

Everything that happens (begins to be) presupposes some­
thing which it follows in accordance with a rule.

[In the second edition:]

<All alterations occur in accordance with the law of the
connection of cause and effect.>

Proof

B 233

<b(That all appearances of the temporal sequence are collectively only
alterations, i.e., a successive being and not-being of the determinations
of the substance that persists there, consequently that the being of the
substance itself, which succeeds its not-being, or its not-being, which
succeeds its being, in other words, that the arising or perishing of the
substance does not occur, the previous principle has shown. This could
also have been expressed thus: All change (succession) of appear­
ances is only alteration; for the arising or perishing of substance are
not alterations of it, since the concept of alteration presupposes one and
the same subject as existing with two opposed determinations, and thus
as persisting. - After this preliminary reminder the proof follows.)
I perceive that appearances succeed one another, i.e., that a state of
things exists at one time the opposite of which existed in the previous
state. Thus I really connect two perceptions in time. Now connection
is not the work of mere sense and intuition, but is here rather the prod­
uct of a synthetic faculty of the imagination, which determines inner
sense with regard to temporal relations. This, however, can combine
the two states in question in two different ways, so that either one or
the other precedes in time; for time cannot be perceived in itself, nor
can what precedes and what follows in objectsC be as it were empirically
determined in relationd to it. I am therefore only conscious that my
a In the first edition: "Principle of Generation."
b

The following two paragraphs were added in the second edition.

, Objecte
d Beziehung
3 04

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

imagination places one state before and the other after, not that the one
state precedes the other in the object;a or, in other words, through the
mere perception the objective relation of the appearances that are suc­
ceeding one another remains undetermined. Now in order for this to be
cognized as determined, the relation between the two states must be
thought in such a way that it is thereby necessarily determined which of
them must be placed before and which after rather than vice versa. The
concept, however, that carries a necessity of synthetic unity with it can
only be a pure concept of understanding, which does not lie in the per­
ception, and that is here the concept of the relation of cause and
effect, the former of which determines the latter in time, as its conse­
quence,b and not as something that could merely precede in the imaginationc (or not even be perceived at all). Therefore it is only because we
subject the sequence of the appearances and thus all alteration to the
law of causality that experience itself, i.e., empirical cognition of them,
is possible; consequently they themselves, as objects of experience, are
possible only in accordance with this law.>
dThe apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always successive. The representations of the parts succeed one another. Whether
they also succeed in the object is a second point for reflection, which is
not contained in the first. Now one can, to be sure, call everything, and
even every representation, insofar as one is conscious of it, an object;'
only what this word is to mean in the case of appearances, not insofar
as they are (as representations) objects,! but rather only insofar as they
designate an objectl requires a deeper investigation. Insofar as they are,
merely as representations, at the same time objects of consciousness,
they do not differ from their apprehension, i.e., from their being taken
up into the synthesis of the imagination, and one must therefore say
that the manifold of appearances is always successively generated in the
mind. If appearances were things in themselves, then no human being
would be able to assess from the succession of representations how the
manifold is combined in the object.h For we have to do only with our
representations; how things in themselves may be (without regard to
Objecte
Folge
, in der Einbildung
a

b

d Although the text common to the two editions resumes here, in his copy of the first edi­

tion Kant crossed out the next fourteen paragraphs, through A 2 o r / B 2 46, suggesting
that at one point he had contemplated an extensive revision of the second analogy that
he did not in the end undertake (E, p. 34).

, Object
f Objecte
g Object
h Object
305

B 234

A 189

B235
A 190

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 236
A I91

B 237
A 192

representations through which they affect us) is entirely beyond our
cognitive sphere. Now although the appearances are not things in
themselves, and nevertheless are the only thing that can be given to us
for cognition, I still have to show what sort of combination in time per­
tains to the manifold in the appearances itself even though the repre­
sentation of it in apprehension is always successive. Thus, e.g., the
apprehension of the manifold in the appearance of a house that stands
before me is successive. Now the question is whether the manifold of
this house itself is also successive, which certainly no one will concede.
Now, however, as soon as I raise my concept of an object to transcendental significance, the house is not a thing in itself at all but only an
appearance, i.e., a representation, the transcendental object of which is
unknown; therefore what do I understand by the question, how the
manifold may be combined in the appearance itself (which is yet noth­
ing in itself)? Here that which lies in the successive apprehension is
considered as representation, but the appearance that is given to me, in
spite of the fact that it is nothing more than a sum of these representa­
tions, is considered as their object, with which my concept, which I
draw from the representations of apprehension, is to agree. One quickly
sees that, since the agreement of cognition with the object" is truth,
only the formal conditions of empirical truth can be inquired after here,
and appearance, in contradistinction to the representations of appre­
hension, can thereby only be represented as the object' that is distinct
from them if it stands under a rule that distinguishes it from every other
apprehension, and makes one way of combining the manifold necessary.
That in the appearance which contains the condition of this necessary
rule of apprehension is the object."
Now let us proceed to our problem. That something happens, i.e.,
that something or a state comes to be that previously was not, cannot
be empirically perceived except where an appearance precedes that does
not contain this state in itself; for a reality that would follow on an
empty time, thus an arising not preceded by any state of things, can be
apprehended just as little as empty time itself. Every apprehension of an
occurrence is therefore a perception that follows another one. Since
this is the case in all synthesis of apprehension, however, as I have
shown above in the case of the appearance of a house, the apprehension
of an occurrence is not yet thereby distinguished from any other. Yet I
also note that, if in the case of an appearance that contains a happening
I call the preceding state of perception A and the following one B, then
B can only follow A in apprehension, but the perception A cannot fola Object

b Object
, Object

3 06

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

low but only precede B. E.g., I see a ship driven downstream. My per­
ception of its position downstream follows the perception of its position
upstream, and it is impossible that in the apprehension of this appear­
ance the ship should first be perceived downstream and afterwards up­
stream. The order in the sequence of the perceptions in apprehension
is therefore here determined, and the apprehension is bound to it. In
the previous example of a house my perceptions could have begun at its
rooftop and ended at the ground, but could also have begun below and
ended above; likewise I could have apprehended the manifold of empirical intuition from the right or from the left. I n the series o f these
perceptions there was therefore no determinate order that made it necessary when I had to begin i n the apprehension in order to combine the
manifold empirically. But this rule is always to be found in the perception of that which happens, and it makes the order of perceptions that
follow one another (in the apprehension of this appearance) necessary.
In our case I must therefore derive the subjective sequence of ap­
prehension from the objective sequence of appearances, for otherwise
the former would be entirely undetermined and no appearance would
be distinguished from any other. The former alone proves nothing
about the connection of the manifold in the object,a because it is en­
tirely arbitrary. This connection must therefore consist in the order of
the manifold of appearance in accordance with which the apprehension
of one thing (that which happens) follows that of the other (which pre­
cedes) in accordance with a rule. Only thereby can I be justified in say­
ing of the appearance itself, and not merely of my apprehension, that a
sequence is to be encountered in it, which is to say as much as that I can­
not arrange the apprehension otherwise than in exactly this sequence.
In accordance with such a rule there must therefore lie in that which
in general precedes an occurrence the condition for a rule, in accordance with which this occurrence always and necessarily follows; conversely, however, I cannot go back from the occurrence and determine
(through apprehension) what precedes. For no appearance goes back
from the following point of time to the preceding one, but it is related
merely to some preceding point or other; on the contrary, the
progress from a given time to the determinately following one is necessary. Hence, since there is still something that follows, I must necessarily relate it to something else in general that precedes, and on which it
follows in accordance with a rule, i.e., necessarily, so that the occurrence, as the conditioned, yields a secure indication of some condition,
but it is the latter that determines the occurrence.
If one were to suppose that nothing preceded an occurrence that it
must follow in accordance with a rule, then all sequence of perception
a

Object
307

B 238
A 193

B 239
A 1 94

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 240
A I 95

B 241
AI96

would be determined solely in apprehension, i.e., merely subjectively,
but it would not thereby be objectively determined which of the per­
ceptions must really be the preceding one and which the succeeding
one. In this way we would have only a play of representations that
would not be related to any objecta at all, i.e., by means of our percep­
tion no appearance would be distinguished from any other as far as the
temporal relation is concerned, since the succession in the apprehend­
ing is always the same, and there is therefore nothing in the appearance
that determines it so that a certain sequence is thereby made necessary
as objective. I would therefore not say that in appearance two states follow one another, but rather only that one apprehension follows the
other, which is something merely subjective, and determines no ob­
ject,b and thus cannot count as the cognition of any object (not even in
the appearance).
If, therefore, we experience that something happens, then we always
presuppose that something else precedes it, which it follows in accor­
dance with a rule. For without this I would not say of the object" that it
follows, since the mere sequence in my apprehension, if it is not, by
means of a rule, determined in relation to something preceding, does
not justify any sequence in the object.d Therefore I always make my
subjective synthesis (of apprehension) objective with respect to a rule in
accordance with which the appearances in their sequence, i.e., as they
occur, are determined through the preceding state, and only under this
presupposition alone is the experience of something that happens even
possible.
To be sure, it seems as if this contradicts everything that has always
been said about the course of the use of our understanding, according
to which it is only through the perception and comparison of sequences
of many occurrences on preceding appearances that we are led to discover a rule, in accordance with which certain occurrences always fol­
low certain appearances, and are thereby first prompted to form the
concept of cause. On such a footing this concept would be merely em­
pirical, and the rule that it supplies, that everything that happens has a
cause, would be just as contingent as the experience itself: its universal­
ity and necessity would then be merely feigned, and would have no true
universal validity, since they would not be grounded a priori but only on
induction. But the case is the same here as with other pure a priori rep­
resentations (e.g., space and time) that we can extract as clear concepts
from experience only because we have put them into experience, and
Object
Object
, Object
d Objecte
a

b

3 08

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

experience is hence first brought about through them. Of course the
logical clarity of this representation of a rule determining the series of
occurrences, as that of a concept of cause, is only possible if we have
made use of it in experience, but a consideration of it, as the condition
of the synthetic unity of the appearances in time, was nevertheless the
ground of experience itself, and therefore preceded it a priori.
It is therefore important to show by an example that even in experience we never ascribe sequence (of an occurrence, in which something happens that previously did not exist) to the object,a and
distinguish it from the subjective sequence of our apprehension, except when a rule is the ground that necessitates us to observe this
order of the perceptions rather than another, indeed that it is really
this necessitation that first makes possible the representation of a succession in the object.b
We have representations in us, of which we can also become con­
scious. But let this consciousness reach as far and be as exact and pre­
cise as one wants, still there always remain only representations, i.e.,
inner determinations of our mind in this or that temporal relation. Now
how do we come to posit an object C for these representations, or ascribe
to their subjective reality, as modifications, some sort of objective real­
ity? Objective significance cannot consist in the relation d to another
representation (of that which one would call the object), for that would
simply raise anew the question: How does this representation in turn go
beyond itself and acquire objective significmce in addition to the sub­
jective significance that is proper to it as a determination of the state of
mind? If we investigate what new characteristic is given to our repre­
sentations by the relatione to an object, and what is the dignity that
they thereby receive, we find that it does nothing beyond making the
combination of representations necessary in a certain way, and subjecting them to a rule; and conversely that objective significance is conferred on our representations only insofar as a certain order in their
temporal relation is necessary.
In the synthesis of the appearances the manifold representations
always follow one another. Now by this means no object! at all is rep­
resented; since through this sequence, which is common to all appre­
hensions, nothing is distinguished from anything else. But as soon as I
perceive or anticipate that there is in this sequence a relationg to the
Object
Object
, Object
d Beziehung
, Beziehung
f Object
g Beziehung
n

b

3 09

B 242
A 197

B 243
A 198

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 244
A 199

B 245

A 200

preceding state, from which the representation follows in accordance
with a rule, I represent something as an occurrence, or as something
that happens, i.e., I cognize an object that I must place in time in a de­
terminate position, which, after the preceding state, cannot be other­
wise assigned to it. Thus if I perceive that something happens, then the
first thing contained in this representation is that something precedes,
for it is just in relationa to this that the appearance acquires its tempo­
ral relation, that, namely, of existing after a preceding time in which it
did not. But it can only acquire its determinate temporal position in this
relation through something being presupposed in the preceding state
on which it always follows, i.e., follows in accordance with a rule: from
which it results, first, that I cannot reverse the series and place that
which happens prior to that which it follows; and, second, that if the
state that precedes is posited, than this determinate occurrence in­
evitably and necessarily follows. Thereby does it come about that there
is an order among our representations, in which the present one (insofar as it has come to be) points to some preceding state as a correlate,
to be sure still undetermined, of this event that is given, which is, how­
ever, determinately related to the latter, as its consequence, and neces­
sarily connected with it in the temporal series.
Now if it is a necessary law of our sensibility, thus a formal condi­
tion of all perceptions, that the preceding time necessarily determines
the following time (in that I cannot arrive at the following time except
by passing through the preceding one), then it is also an indispensable
law of the empirical representation of the temporal series that the
appearances of the past time determine every existence in the following
time, and that these, as occurrences, do not take place except insofar as
the former determine their existence in time, i.e., establish it in accor­
dance with a rule. For only in the appearances can we empirically
cognize this continuity in the connectionb of times.
Understanding belongs to all experience and its possibility, and the
first thing that it does for this is not to make the representation of the
objects distinct, but rather to make the representation of an object possible at all. Now this happens through its conferring temporal order on
the appearances and their existence by assigning to each of these, as a
consequence, a place in time determined a priori in regard to the pre­
ceding appearances, without which it would not agree with time itself,
which determines the position of all its parts a priori. Now this deter­
mination of position cannot be borrowed from the relation of the ap­
pearances to absolute time (for that is not an object of perception), but,
conversely, the appearances themselves must determine their positions
a Beziehung
Zusammenhange

b

3 10

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

in time for each other, and make this determination in the temporal
order necessary, i.e., that which follows or happens must succeed that
which was contained in the previous state in accordance with a general
rule, from which arises a series of appearances, in which by means of the
understanding the very same order and constant connectiona in the se­
ries of possible perceptions is produced and made necessary as would be
encountered a priori in the form of inner experience (time), in which all
perceptions would have to have their place.
That something happens, therefore, is a perception that belongs to a
possible experience, which becomes actual if! regard the position of the
appearance as determined in time, thus if I regard it as an objectb that
can always be found in the connectionc of perceptions in accordance
with a rule. This rule for determining something with respect to its
temporal sequence, however, is that in what precedes, the condition is
to be encountered under which the occurrence always (i.e., necessarily)
follows. Thus the principle of sufficient reasond is the ground of possible experience, namely the objective cognition of appearances with regard to their relation in the successive seriese of time.
The ground of proof of this proposition, however, rests solely on the
following moments. To all empirical cognition there belongs the syn­
thesis of the manifold through the imagination, which is always succes­
sive; i.e., the representations always follow each other in it. But the
order of the sequence (what must precede and what must follow) is not
determined in the imagination at all, and the series of successive! rep­
resentations can be taken backwards just as well as forwards. But if this
synthesis is a synthesis of apprehension (of the manifold of a given ap­
pearance), then the order in the objectg is determined, or, to speak more
precisely, there is therein an order of the successive synthesis that de­
termines an object,h in accordance with which something would neces­
sarily have to precede and, if this is posited, the other would necessarily
have to follow. If, therefore, my perception is to contain the cognition
of an occurrence, namely that something actually happens, then it must
be an empirical judgment in which one thinks that the sequence is de­
termined, i.e., that it presupposes another appearance in time which it
follows necessarily or in accordance with a rule. Contrariwise, if I were
to posit that which precedes and the occurrence did not follow it necZusammenhang
Object
, Zusammenhang
d der Satz vom zureichenden Grunde
, Reihenfolge
f Following Erdmann, reading der einanderfllgender instead of der einen derfllgenden.
g Object
h Object
a

b

311

B 246
AWl

B 247

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 202

B 248

A 203

B 249

essarily, then I would have to hold it to be only a subjective play of my
imaginings, and if I still represented something objective by it I would
have to call it a mere dream. Thus the relation of appearances (as pos­
sible perceptions) in accordance with which the existence of that which
succeeds (what happens) is determined in time necessarily and in ac­
cordance with a rule by something that precedes it, consequently the
relation of cause to effect, is the condition of the objective validity of
our empirical judgments with regard to the series of perceptions, thus
of their empirical truth, and therefore of experience. Hence the princi­
ple of the causal relation in the sequence of appearances is valid for all
objects of experience (under the conditions of succession), since it is it­
self the ground of the possibility of such an experience.
Here, however, there is a reservation that must be raised. The prin­
ciple of causal connection among appearances is, in our formula, lim­
ited to the successiona of them, although in the use of this principle it
turns out that it also applies to their accompaniment,b and cause and ef­
fect can be simultaneous. E.g., there is warmth in a room that is not to
be encountered in the outside air. I look around for the cause, and find
a heated stove. Now this, as the cause, is simultaneous with its effect,
the warmth of the chamber; thus here there is no succession' in time
between cause and effect, rather they are simultaneous, yet the law still
holds. The majority of efficient causesd in nature are simultaneous with
their effects, and the temporal sequence of the latter is occasioned only
by the fact that the cause cannot achieve its entire effect in one instant.
But in the instant in which the effect first arises, it is always simultane­
ous with the causality of its cause, since if the cause had ceased to be an
instant before then the effect would never have arisen. Here one must
note that it is the order of time and not its lapse that is taken account
of; the relation remains even if no time has elapsed. The time between
the causality of the cause and its immediate effect can be vanishing
(they can therefore be simultaneous), but the temporal relation of the
one to the other still remains determinable. If I consider a ball that lies
on a stuffed pillow and makes a dent in it as a cause, it is simultaneous
with its effect. Yet I still distinguish the two by means of the temporal
relation of the dynamical connection. For if I lay the ball on the pillow
the dent follows its previously smooth shape; but if (for whatever reason) the pillow has a dent, a leaden ball does not follow it.
The temporal sequence is accordingly the only empirical criterion of
the effect in relatione to the causality of the cause that precedes it. The
a Reihenfolge
b Begleitung, here meaning simultaneous occurrence, as earlier at A I83/B 2 26.
Reihenfolge
d Following the fourth edition, reading "Ursachen " instead of "Ursache. "
, Beziehung
,

312

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

glass is the cause of the rising of the water above its horizontal plane,
though both appearances are simultaneous. For as soon as I draw the
water into the glass from a larger vessel, something follows, namely the
alteration of the horizontal state which the water had there into a concave state that it assumes in the glass.
This causality leads to the concept of action, this to the concept of
force, and thereby to the concept of substance.75 Since I will not crowd
my critical project, which concerns solely the sources of synthetic a pri­
ori cognition, with analyses that address merely the elucidation (not the
amplification) of concepts, I leave the detailed discussion of these con­
cepts to a future system of pure reason - especially since one can already
find such an analysis in rich measure even in the familiar textbooks of
this sort. Yet I cannot leave untouched the empirical criterion of a sub­
stance, insofar as it seems to manifest itself better and more readily
through action than through the persistence of the appearance.
\Vhere there is action, consequently activity and force, there is also
substance, and in this alone must the seat of this fruitful source of ap­
pearances be sought. That is quite well said; but if one would explain
what one understands by substance, and in so doing avoid a vicious circle, then the question is not so easily answered. How will one infer directly from the action to the persistence of that which acts, which is yet
such an essential and singular characteristic of the substance (phaenomenon)? Yet given what we have already said, the solution of the question
is not subject to such a difficulty, though after the usual fashion (pro­
ceeding merely analytically with its concepts) it would be entirely insoluble. Action already signifes the relation of the subject of causality to the
effect. Now since all effect consists in that which happens, consequently
in the changeable, which indicates succession in time, the ultimate subject of the changeable is therefore that which persists, as the substratum of everything that changes, i.e., the substance. For according to the
principle of causality actions are always the primary ground of all
change of appearances, and therefore cannot lie in a subject that itself
changes, since otherwise further actions and another subject, which de­
termines this change, would be required. Now on this account action, as
a sufficient empirical criterion, proves substantiality without it being
necessary for me first to seek out its persistence through compared perceptions, a way in which the completeness that is requisite for the quantitya and strict universality of the concept could not be attained. For that
the primary subject of the causality of all arising and perishing cannot
itself arise and perish (in the field of appearances) is a certain inference,
which leads to empirical necessity and persistence in existence, consequently to the concept of a substance as appearance.
a Griifie
313

A 204

B 250

A 20S

B251

A 206

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 2S2

A207

B 2 S3

A208

A 207 / B 25 2

If something happens, the mere arising, without regard to that which
comes to be, is already in itself an object of investigation. It is already
necessary to investigate the transition from the non-being of a state to
this state, assuming that this state contained no quality in the appear­
ance. This arising concerns, as was shown in section A,a not the sub­
stance (for that does not arise), but its state. It is therefore merely
alteration, and not an origination out of nothing. If this origination is
regarded as the effect of a foreign cause, then it is called creation, which
cannot be admitted as an occurrence among the appearances, for its
possibility alone would already undermine the unity of experience,
though if I consider all things not as phenomena but rather as things in
themselves and as objects of mere understanding, then, though they are
substances, they can be regarded as dependent for their existence on a
foreign cause; which, however, would introduce entirely new meanings
for the words and would not apply to appearances as possible objects of
experience.
Now how in general anything can be altered, how it is possible that
upon a state in one point of time an opposite one could follow in the
next - of these we have a priori not the least concept. For this acquain­
tance with actual forces is required, which can only be given empiri­
cally, e.g., acquaintance with moving forces, or, what comes to the same
thing, with certain successive appearances (as motions) which indicate
such forces. But the form of such an alteration, the condition under
which alone it, as the arising of another state, can occur (whatever the
content, i.e., the state, that is altered might be), consequently the suc­
cession of the states itself (that which has happened), can still be con­
sidered a priori according to the law of causality and the conditions of
time.*
If a substance passes out of a state a into another state b, then the
point in time of the latter is different from the point in time of the first
state and follows it. Likewise the second state as a reality (in the ap­
pearance) is also distinguished from the first, in which it did not yet
exist, as b is distinguished from zero; i.e., if the state b differs from the
state a even only in magnitude, then the alteration would be an arising
of b-a, which did not exist in the prior state, and with regard to which
the latter = o.
* Note well that I am not talking about the alteration of certain relations b in
general, but rather of the alteration of the state. Hence if a body is moved uni­
formly, then it does not alter its state (of motion) at all, although it does if its
motion increases or diminishes.
a

That is, in the "First Analo gy."

b Relationen

3 14

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

The question therefore arises, how a thing passes from one state a
into another one = b. Between two instants there is always a time, and
between two states in those instances there is always a difference that
has a magnitude (for all parts of appearances are always in turn magni­
tudes). Thus every transition from one state into another happens in a
time that is contained between two instants, of which the former deter­
mines the state from which the thing proceeds and the second the state
at which it arrives. Both are therefore boundaries of the time of an al­
teration, consequently of the intermediate state between two states, and
as such they belong to the whole alteration. Now every alteration has a
cause, which manifests its causality in the entire time during which the
alteration proceeds. Thus this cause does not produce its alteration suddenly (all at once or in an instant), but rather in a time, so that as the
time increases from the initial instant a to its completion in b, the magnitude of the reality (b-a) is also generated through all the smaller degrees that are contained between the first and the last. All alteration is
therefore possible only through a continuous action of causality, which,
insofar as it is uniform, is called a moment. The alteration does not consist of these moments, but it is generated through them as their effect.
That is, now, the law of the continuity of all alteration, the ground of
which is this: That neither time nor appearance in time consists of small­
est parts, and that nevertheless in its alteration the state of thing passes
through all these parts, as elements, to its second state. No difference
of the real in appearance is the smallest, just as no difference in the
magnitude of times is, and thus the new state of reality grows out of the
first, in which it did not exist, through all the infinite degrees of reality,
the differences between which are all smaller than that between a and a.
What utility this proposition may have in research into nature does
not concern us here. But how such a proposition, which seems to am­
plify our cognition of nature so much, is possible completely a priori,
very much requires our scrutiny, even though it is obvious that it is real
and correct, and one might therefore believe oneself to be relieved of
the question how i t i s possible. For there are s o many unfounded pre­
sumptions of the amplification of our cognition through pure reason
that it must be adopted as a general principle to be distrustful of them
all and not to believe and accept even the clearest dogmatic proof of this
sort of proposition without documents that could provide a wellgrounded deduction.
All growth of empirical cognitions and every advance in perception is
nothing but an amplification of the determination of inner sense, i.e., a
progress in time, whatever the objects may be, either appearances or
pure intuitions. This progress in time determines everything, and is not
itself determined by anything further: i.e., its parts are only in time, and
given through the synthesis of it, but they are not given before it. For
=

3 15

B 254

A 209

B 255

A 2 IO

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 256

A2I I

this reason every transition in perception to something that follows in
time is a determination of time through the generation of this percep­
tion and, since that is always and in all its parts a magnitude, the gener­
ation of a perception as a magnitude through all degrees, of which none
is the smallest, from zero to its determinate degree. It is from this that
the possibility of cognizing a priori a law concerning the form of alterations becomes obvious. We anticipate only our own apprehension, the
formal condition of which, since it is present in us prior to all given ap­
pearance, must surely be able to be cognized a priori.
In the same way, then, that time is the a priori sensible condition of the
possibility of a continuous progress of that which exists to that which fol­
lows it, the understanding, by means of the unity of apperception, is the
a priori condition of the possibility of a continuous determination of all
positions for the appearances in this time, through the series of causes
and effects, the former of which inevitably draw the existence of the lat­
ter after them and thereby make the empirical cognition of temporal re­
lations (universally) valid for all time, thus objectively valid.
C.
Third Analogy.
<Principle of simultaneity, according to the law of
interaction, or community.>a

[In the first edition:]
All substances, insofar as they are simultaneous, stand in
thoroughgoing community (i.e., interaction with one another).

[In the second edition:]
<All substances, insofar as they can be perceived in space as
simultaneous, are in thoroughgoing interaction.>76
Proof

B 25 7

b<Things are simultaneous if in empirical intuition the perception of
one can follow the perception of the other reciprocally (which in the
temporal sequence of appearances, as has been shown in the case of the
second principle, cannot happen). Thus I can direct my perception first
to the moon and subsequently to the earth, or, conversely, first to the
earth and then subsequently to the moon, and on this account, since the
perceptions of these objects can follow each other reciprocally, I say that
they exist simultaneously. Now simultaneity is the existence of the man­
ifold at the same time. But one cannot perceive time itself and thereby
a In the first edition: "Principle of community."

b This paragraph added in the second edition.

3 16

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

derive from the fact that things are positioned at the same time that
their perceptions can follow each other reciprocally. The synthesis of
the imagination in apprehension would therefore only present each of
these perceptions as one that is present in the subject when the other is
not, and conversely, but not that the objectsa are simultaneous, i.e., that
if the one is then the other also is in the same time, and that this is nec­
essary in order for the perceptions to be able to succeed each other re­
ciprocally. Consequently, a concept of the understanding of the
reciprocal sequence of the determinations of these things simultane­
ously existing externally to each other is required in order to say that the
reciprocal sequence of perceptions is grounded in the object,b and
thereby to represent the simultaneity as objective. Now, however, the
relation of substances in which the one contains determinations the
ground of which is contained in the other is the relation of influence,
and, if the latter reciprocally contains the ground of the determinations
of the former, it is the relation of community or interaction. Thus the
simultaneity of substances in space cannot be cognized in experience
otherwise than under the presupposition of an interaction among them;
this is therefore also the condition of the possibility of the things themselves as objects of experience.>
CThings are simultaneous insofar as they exist at one and the same
time. But how does one cognize that they exist at one and the same
time? If the order in the synthesis of the apprehension of this manifold
is indifferent, i.e., if it can proceed from A through B, C, and D to E,
but also conversely from E to A. For if they existedd in time one after
the other (in the order that begins with A and ends at E), then it would
be impossible to begin the apprehension at the perception of E and proceed backwards to A, since A would belong to past time, and thus can
no longer be an object of apprehension.'·77
Now if you assume that in a manifold of substances as appearances
n

b

Objecte
Objecte

, The text common to the two editions resumes here.
d Reading sie waren instead of sie ware, so that the antecedent can be plural; even so, it re­
mains unclear whether Kant intends the antecedent to be the "things" referred to at the
beginning of the paragraph, or the representations A through E constituting the manifold.
, In his copy of the first edition, Kant struck out the preceding paragraph and inserted the
following note: "Space makes community possible. Now since the thinking being with
all its faculties, whose effects belong merely to inner sense, is not a relation [Relation] of
space, the commercium of the soul with the body is therefore not comprehensible. The
community of things in themselves must either have a third substance, in which they
exist as accidentia and are in relation to one another - Spinozism - or, since this won't do,
it remains incomprehensible. Space is itself the phaenomenon of possible community. If I
consider bodies merely as phaenomena that are in me, the cognitive faculty of inner sense
may well stand in community with those of outer sense." ( E LXXXVI, p. 34; 2 3 : 3 1-2)

3 17

B 258

A2I I

A212

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

B 259

A2I3

B 2 60

each of them would be completely isolated, i.e., none would affect any
other nor receive a reciprocal influence from it, then I say that their si­
multaneity would not be the object of a possible perception, and that
the existence o f the one could not lead to the existence o f the other by
any path of empirical synthesis. For if you thought that they were sep­
arated by a completely empty space, then the perception that proceeds
from one to the other in time would certainly determine the existence
of the latter by means of a succeeding perception, but would not be able
to distinguish whether that appearance objectively follows the former
or is rather simultaneous with it.
In addition to the mere existence there must therefore be something
through which A determines the position of B in time, and conversely
also something by which B does the same for A, since only under this
condition can those substances be empirically represented as existing
simultaneously. Now only that determines the position of another in
time which is the cause of it or its determinations. Thus each substance
(since it can be a consequencea only with regard to its determinations)
must simultaneously contain the causality of certain determinations in
the other and the effects of the causality of the other, i.e., they must
stand in dynamical community (immediately or mediately) if their si­
multaneity is to be cognized in any possible experience. But now every­
thing in regard to objects of experience is necessary without which the
experience of these objects itself would be impossible. Thus it is neces­
sary for all substances in appearance, insofar as they are simultaneous,
to stand in thoroughgoing community of interaction with each other.
The word "community"b is ambiguous in our language, and can
mean either communio or commercium. c We use it here in the latter sense,
as a dynamical community, without which even the local community
(communio spatii)d could never be empirically cognized. From our expe­
riences it is easy to notice that only continuous influence in all places in
space can lead our sense from one object to another, that the light that
plays between our eyes and the heavenly bodies effects a mediate com­
munity between us and the latter and thereby proves the simultaneity
of the latter, and that we cannot empirically alter any place (perceive
this alteration) without matter everywhere making the perception of
our position possible; and only by means of its reciprocal influence can
it establish their simultaneity and thereby the coexistence of even the
most distant objects (though only mediately). Without community
Falge
b Gemeinschaft
a

, Le., "community" or "commerce," the former connoting membership in a common
whole but not necessarily interaction among the parts, the latter connoting interaction.
d "Community of spaces," that is, a single spatial order or relationship among multiple
objects.

318

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

every perception (of appearance in space) is broken off from the others,
and the chain of empirical representations, i.e., experience, would have
to start entirely over with every new objecta without the previous one
being in the least connected o r being able to stand in a temporal relation with it. I do not in the least hereby mean to refute empty space;
that may well exist where perceptions do not reach, and thus where no
empirical cognition of simultaneity takes place; but it is then hardly an
object b for our possible experience at all.
The following can serve as an elucidation. In our mind all appear­
ances, as contained in a possible experience, must stand in a community
(communio) of apperception, and insofar as the objects are to be repre­
sented as being connected by existing simultaneously, they must recip­
rocally determine their position in one time and thereby constitute a
whole. If this subjective community is to rest on an objective ground, or
is to be related to appearances as substances, then the perception of one,
as ground, must make possible the perception of the other, and con­
versely, so that the succession that always exists in the perceptions, as
apprehensions, will not be ascribed to the objects, c but these can instead
be represented as existing simultaneously. But this is a reciprocal influ­
ence, i.e., a real community (commercium) of substances, without which
the empirical relation of simultaneity could not obtain in experience.
Through this commerced the appearances, insofar as they stand outside
one another and yet in connection, constitute a composite (compositum
reale), and composites! of this sort are possible in many ways. Hence the
three dynamical relations, from which all others arise, are those of in­
herence, of consequence, and of composition.g
* * *

These, then, are the three analogies of experience. They are nothing
other than principles of the determination of the existence of appear­
ances in time, in accordance with all three of its modi: that of the rela­
tion to time itself, as a magnitude (the magnitude of existence, i.e.,
duration); that of the relation in time, as a series (one after another); and
finally that in time as a sum of all existence (simultaneous). This unity
of time-determination is through and through dynamical, i.e., time is
not regarded as that within which experience immediately determines
Object
Object
, Objecten
d Commercium, printed as a German rather than Latin word.
Zusammengesetztes
f Composita, printed as a German rather than Latin word.
g Composition
a

b

,

3 19

A 2 14
B 261

A2 15
B 262

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Ch. II

A 2 16/B 263

B 264
A2 I7

the position of each existence, which is impossible, since absolute time
is not an object of perception by means of which appearances could be
held together; rather the rule of the understanding, through which
alone the existence of appearances can acquire synthetic unity in tem­
poral relations, determines the position of each of them in time, thus a
priori and validly for each and every time.
By nature (in the empirical sense) we understand the combination of
appearances as regards their existence, in accordance with necessary
rules, i.e., in accordance with laws. There are therefore certain laws,
and indeed a priori, which first make a nature possible; the empirical
laws can only obtain and be found by means of experience, and indeed
in accord with its original laws, in accordance with which experience it­
self first becomes possible. Our analogies therefore really exhibit the
unity of nature in the combination of all appearances under certain ex­
ponents, which express nothing other than the relation of time (insofar
as it comprehends all existence in itself) to the unity of apperception,
which can only obtain in synthesis in accordance with rules. Thus to­
gether they say: All appearances lie in one nature, and must lie therein,
since without this a priori unity no unity of experience, thus also no de­
termination of the objects in it, would be possible.
About the method of proof, however, which we have employed in the
case of these transcendental laws of nature, and about its singularity,
one remark is to be made, which must be very important as a precept
for every other attempt to prove intellectual and at the same time syn­
thetic a priori propositions. If we had wanted to prove these analogies
dogmatically, i.e., from concepts - namely, that everything that exists
will only be encountered in that which persists; that every occurrence
presupposes something in the previous state, which it follows in accor­
dance with a rule; finally, that in the manifold that is simultaneous the
states are simultaneous in relationa to each other in accordance with a
rule (stand in community) - then all effort would have been entirely in
vain. For one cannot get from one object and its existence to the exis­
tence of another or its way of existing through mere concepts of these
things, no matter how much one analyzes them. So what is left for us?
The possibility of experience, as a cognition in which in the end all ob­
jects must be able to be given to us if their representation is to have ob­
jective reality for us. In this third thing, now, the essential form of
which consists in the synthetic unity of the apperception of all appear­
ances, we found a priori conditions of the thoroughgoing and necessary
time-determination of all existence in appearance, without which even
empirical time-determination would be impossible, and we found rules
of synthetic a priori unity by means of which we could anticipate expea Beziehung

320

Section III. Systematic representation of all synthetic principles

rience. In the absence of this method, and in the delusion of wanting to
prove dogmatically synthetic propositions that the empirical use of the
understanding recommends as its principles,a a proof of the principle of
sufficient reason was often sought, but always in vain. No one ever even
thought of the other two analogies, though one always tacitly employed
them, * since the clue of the categories was missing, which alone can uncover and make noticeable every gap of the understanding, in concepts
as well as in principles.

B 265
A2IS
