
Appendix
On the amphiboly of the concepts
of rejlection b through the confusion of the
empirical use of the understanding with
the transcendental.
a

A 260/B 3 16

A261
B 317

Reflectionc (rejlexio) does not have to do with objects themselves, in
order to acquire concepts directly from them, but is rather the state of
mind in which we first prepare ourselves to find out the subjective con­
ditions under which we can arrive at concepts.97 It is the consciousness
of the relation d of given representations to our various sources of cog­
nition, through which alone their relation among themselves can be
correctly determined. The first question prior to all further treatment
of our representation is this: In which cognitive faculty do they belong
together? Is it the understanding or is it the senses before which they
are connected or compared? Many a judgment is accepted out of habit,
or connected through inclination: but since no reflection preceded or at
least critically succeeded it, i t counts as one that has received its origin
in the understanding. Not all judgments require an investigation, i.e.,
attention to the grounds of truth; for if they are immediately certain,
e.g., between two points there can b e only one straight line, then no
further mark of truth can be given for them than what they themselves
express. But all judgments, indeed all comparisons, require a reflec­
tion, i.e., a distinction of the cognitive power to which the given con-

a There are only minor differences between the versions of this section in the two edi­

b

tions, mostly changes in orthography that do not affect the translation. Thus only one
version of the section will be presented here.

Reflexion
, Uberlegung; since the following parenthesis shows that Kant treats this Germanic term
as synonymous with the Latinate Reflexion, we will not mark any distinction between
occurrences of Uberlegung and Reflexion.
d Verbaltnisses. Since Beziebung occurs only three times in this section, we will note only
when "relation" is used to translate that term rather than the far more frequent occur­
rences of Verbaltnis.

3 66

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

cepts belong.a The action through which I make the comparison of rep­
resentations in general with the cognitive power in which they are sit­
uated, and through which I distinguish whether they are to be
compared to one another as belonging to the pure understanding or to
pure intuition, I call transcendental reflection. The relation, however,
in which the concepts in a state of mind can belong to each other are
those of identity and difference, of agreement and opposition, of the
inner and the outer, and finally of the determinable and the deter­
mination (matter and form). The correct determination of this relation
depends on the cognitive power in which they subjectively belong to
each other, whether in sensibility or in understanding. For the differ­
ence in the latter makes a great difference in the way in which one
ought to think of the former.
Prior to all objective judgments we compare the concepts, with regard to identityb (of many representations under one concept) for the
sake of universal judgments, or their difference, for the generation of
particular ones, with regard to agreement, for affirmative judgments,
or opposition,' for negative ones, etc. On this ground it would seem
that we ought to call these concepts concepts of comparison (conceptus
comparationis). But since, if it is not the logical form but the content of
concepts that is concerned, i.e., whether the things themselves are identical or different, in agreement or in opposition, etc., the things can
have a twofold relation to our power of cognition, namely to sensibility
and to understanding, yet it is this place in which they belong that concerns how they ought to belong to each other, then it is transcendental
reflection, i.e., the relation of given representations to one or the other
kind of cognition, that can alone determine their relation among themselves, and whether the things are identical or different, in agreement
or in opposition, etc., cannot immediately be made out from the concepts themselves through mere comparison (comparatio), but rather only
through the distinction of the kind of cognition to which they belong,
by means of a transcendental reflection (reflexio). To be sure, one could
a Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "The judgment in accordance with concepts
of reflection is, with regard to things in themselves, analytic, only the consciousness to
determine, in appearances, is synthetic." (E CXLI, p. 44; 2 3 : 3 7)
b Einerleybeit. The following note is inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "VV"hether
identical concepts of things prove one and the same thing, and therefore no multiplicity,
or whether in spite of complete identity of concepts there can yet be many things, on ac­
count of the difference in places - this belongs to logical quantity." (E CXLII, p. 44;
2 3 '37)
, Widerstreit. Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Mutually non-contradictory
concepts of realities are in agreement. Can I therefore say that the things are in agree­
ment, which consist in those very things together? Conversely, can two opposed deter­
minations in an alteration be in opposition to each other in the thing in itself, but in
agreement in the phaenomenon?" (E CXLIII, pp. 44-5; 23:37)

3 67

A 262

B 3 18

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

A 26 3
B 3 19

A 2 64
B 3 20

therefore say that logical reflection is a mere comparison, for in its
case there is complete abstraction from the cognitive power to which
the given representations belong, and they are thus to be treated the
same as far as their seat in the mind is concerned; transcendental re­
flection, however, (which goes to the objects themselves) contains the
ground of the possibility of the objective comparison of the representa­
tions to each other, and is therefore very different from the other, since
the cognitive power to which the representations belong is not precisely
the same. This transcendental reflection is a duty from which no one
can escape ifhe would judge anything about things a priori. We will now
take it in hand, and will draw from it not a little illumination of the de­
termination of the proper business of the understanding.a
1 . Identity and difference.98 If an object is presented to us several
times, but always with the same inner determinations (qualitas et quan­
titas), then it is always exactly the same if it counts as an object of pure
understanding, not many but only oneb thing (numerica identitas)/ but if
it is appearance, then the issue is not the comparison of concepts, but
rather, however identical everything may be in regard to that, the dif­
ference of the places of these appearances at the same time is still an ad­
equate ground for the numerical difference of the object (of the
senses) itself. Thus, in the case of two drops of water one can completely abstract from all inner difference (of quality and quantity), and
it is enough that they be intuited in different places at the same time in
order for them to be held to be numerically different. Leibniz99 took
the appearances for things in themselves, thus for intelligibilia, i.e., ob­
jects of the pure understanding (although on account of the confusion
of their representations he labeled them with the name ofphenomena),d
and there his principle of non-discernibility (principium identitatis in­
discernibilium), could surely not be disputed,IOO but since they are ob­
jects of sensibility, and the understanding with regard to them is not of
pure but of empirical use, multiplicity and numerical difference are al­
ready given by space itself as the condition of outer appearances. For a
part of space, even though it might be completely similar and equal to
anotller, is nevertheless outside of it, and is on that account a different
part from that which is added to it in order to constitute a larger space;
and this must therefore hold of everything that exists simultaneously in
Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "These propositions obviously teach that
space and time hold only of things, and among them also of ourselves, as appearances;
for otherwise they would not yield entirely opposed propositions, like those we assert
of things in themselves." (E CXLIV; p. 45; 2 3 : 3 7)
b In the first edition, "many" (viel) and "only one" (nur Ein) were emphasized.
, numerical identity
d Not in roman type.
, principle of the identity of indiscernibles
a

3 68

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

the various positions in space, no matter how similar and equal they
might otherwise be.
2. Agreement and opposition. If reality is represented only through
the pure understanding (realitas noumenon), then no opposition be­
tween realities can be thought, i.e., a relation such that when they are
bound together in one subject they cancel out their consequences, as in
3 - 3 = a.a,IOI Realitiesb in appearance (realitas phaenomenon), on the
contrary, can certainly be in opposition with each other and, united in
the same subject, one can partly or wholly destroy the consequence of
the other, like two moving forces in the same straight line that either
push or pull a point in opposed directions, or also like an enjoyment
that balances the scale against a pain. c
3 .d The inner and the outer. In an object of the pure understanding
only that is internal that has no relation e (as far as the existence is concerned) to anything that is different from it. The inner determinations
of a substantia phaenomenonf in space, on the contrary, are nothing but
relations, and it is itself entirely a sum total of mere relations.g,b We
know substance in space only through forces that are efficacious in it,
whether in drawing others to it (attraction) or in preventing penetration
of it (repulsion and impenetrability); we are not acquainted with other
properties constituting the concept of the substance that appears in
space and which we call matter. As object i of the pure understanding,
on the contrary, every substance must have inner determinations and
forces that pertain to its inner reality. Yet what can I think of as inner
accidents except for those which my inner sense offers me? - namely
that which is either itself thinking or which is analogous to one. Thus
because he represented them as noumena, taking away in thought everything that might signify outer relation! thus even composition, Leibniz made out of all substances, even the constituents of matter, simple
subjects gifted with powers of representation, in a word, monads. I02
4. Matter and form. These are two concepts that ground all other rea

b

Kant's copy of the first edition adds: "for reality is opposed to mere negation = 0. "
( E CXLV; p . 45; 2 3 =49)

Das Reale

Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "This misunderstanding causes one to place
all ill and evil in the world, all vice and pain, in mere negations, and to value reality so
highly." (E CXLVI, p. 45; 2 3 = 3 7)
d Added in Kant's copy of the first edition: "Idealism and dualism." (E CXLVII, p. 45)
C

,

Beziehung

g

Relationen

f phenomenal substance
h Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "In space there are solely outer relations, in
i

time purely inner ones; the absolute is absent." (E CXLVIII, p. 45; 2 3 : 3 7)

Object
J Relation

3 69

A 2 6S
B 321

A 266
B 32 2

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

flection, so inseparably are they bound up with every use of the under­
standing. The former signifies the determinable in general, the latter its
determination a (both in the transcendental sense,h since one abstracts
from all differences in what is given and from the way in which that is
determined). The logicians formerly called the universal the matter, but
the specific difference the form. In every judgment one can call the given
concepts logical matter (for judgment), their relation (by means of the
copula) the form of the judgment. In every being its components (essen­
tialia) are the matter; the way in which they are connected in a thing, the
essential form. Also, in respect to things in general, unbounded reality is
regarded as the matter of all possibility, but its limitation (negation) as
A 2 67 that form through which One thing is distinguished from another in ac­
cordance with transcendental concepts. The understanding, namely, deB 3 2 3 mands first that something be given (at least in the concept) in order to
be able to determine it in a certain way. Hence in the concept of pure
understanding matter precedes form, and on this account Leibniz first
assumed things (monads) and an internal power of representation in
them, in order subsequently to ground On that their outer relation and
the community of their states (namely of the representations) on that.
Hence space and time were possible, the former only through the rela­
tion of substances, the latter through the connection of their determina­
tions as grounds and consequences.!03 And so would it in fact have to be
if the pure understanding could be related to objects immediately, and if
space and time were determinations of the things in themselves. But if it
is only sensible intuitions in which we determine all objects merely as
appearances, then the form of intuition (as a subjective constitution of
sensibility) precedes all matter (the sensations), thus space and time pre­
cede all appearances and all data of appearances, and instead first make
the latter possible. The intellectualist philosopher could not bear it that
form should precede the things and determine their possibility; a quite
appropriate criticism, if he assumed that we intuit things as they are
A 268 (though with confused representation). But since sensible intuition is an
B 324 entirely peculiar subjective condition, which grounds all perception a
priori, and the form of which is original, thus the form is given for itself
alone, and so far is it from being the case that the matter (or the things
themselves, which appear) ought to be the ground (as one would have to
judge according to mere concepts), that rather their possibility presup­
poses a formal intuition (of space and time) as given.
a Inserted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "The thoroughgoing determination as prin­

h

ciple [Princip] is grounded on the unity of consciousness: existence determined in space
and time. Hence in noumena the highest reality contains the matter and the form con­
tains the perfection. Theformale is the best." (E CXLIX, p. 45; 2 3 :37)

Verstande
3 70

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

Remark
to the amphiboly of the concepts of reflection.
Allow me to call the position that we assign to a concept either in sen­
sibility or in pure understanding its transcendental place. In the same
way, the estimation of this position that pertains to every concept in ac­
cordance with the difference in its use, and guidance for determining
this place for all concepts in accordance with rules, would be the tran­
scendental topic, a doctrine that would thoroughly protect against
false pretenses of the pure understanding and illusions arising there­
from by always distinguishing to which cognitive power the concepts
properly belong. One can call every concept, every title under which
many cognitions belong, a logical place. On this is grounded the log­
ical topics of Aristotle, which schoolteachers and orators could use in
order to hunt up certain titles of thinking to find that which best fits A 2 6 9
their current matter and rationalize or garrulously chatter about it with B 3 2 5
an appearance of thoroughness. 104
The transcendental topic, on the contrary, contains nothing more
than the four titles for all comparison and distinction introduced above,
which are distinguished from categories by the fact that what is exhib­
ited through them is not the object in accordance with what constitutes
its concept (magnitude, reality), but rather only the comparison of rep­
resentations, in all their manifoldness, which precedes the concepts of
things. This comparison, however, first requires a reflection, i.e., a de­
termination of the place where the representations of the things that are
compared belong, thus of whether they are thought by the pure under­
standing or given in appearance by sensibility.
The concepts can be compared logically without worrying about
where their objectsa belong, whether as noumenab to the understanding
or as phenomena" to sensibility. But if we would get to the objects with
these concepts, then transcendental reflection about which cognitive
power they are objects for, whether for the pure understanding or for
sensibility, is necessary first of all. Without this reflection I can make
only a very insecure use of these concepts, and there arise allegedly syn- .
thetic principles, which critical reason cannot acknowledge and that are A 2 70/ B 3 26
grounded solely on a transcendental amphiboly, i.e., a confusion of the
pure object of the understandingd with the appearance.
Lacking such a transcendental topic, and thus deceived by the am­
phiboly of the concepts of reflection, the famous Leibniz constructed
Objecte
b Not in roman type.
a

, Not in roman type.

d Verstandesobjects
371

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

an intellectual system of the world, or rather believed himself able to
cognize the inner constitution of things by comparing all objects only
with the understanding and the abstract formal concepts of its thinking.
Our table of the concepts of reflection gives us the unexpected advan­
tage of laying before our eyes that which is distinctive in his theory in
all its parts and the leading ground of this peculiar way of thinking,
which rests on nothing but a misunderstanding. He compared all things
with each other solely through concepts, and found, naturally, no other
differences than those through which the understanding distinguishes
its pure concepts from each other. The conditions of sensible intuition,
which bring with them their own distinctions, he did not regard as orig­
inal; for sensibility was only a confused kind of representation for him,
and not a special source of representations; for him appearance was the
representation of the thing in itself, although distinguished from cog­
nition through the understanding in its logical form, since with its cus­
tomary lack of analysis the former draws a certain mixture of subsidiary
representations into the concept of the thing, from which the under­
standing knows how to abstract. In a word, Leibniz intellectualized
the appearances, just as Locke totally sensitivized the concepts of un­
derstanding in accordance with his system of noogony (if ! am permit­
ted this expression), i.e., interpreted them as nothing but empirical or
abstracted concepts of reflection. 105 Instead of seeking two entirely dif­
ferent sources of representation in the understanding and the sensibil­
ity, which could judge about things with objective validity only in
conjunction,a each of these great men holds on only to one of them,
which in his opinion is immediately related to things in themselves,
while the other does nothing but confuse or order the representations
of the first.
Leibniz accordingly compared the objects of the senses with each
other as things in general, merely in the understanding, b first, so far as
they are to be judged by the understanding as identical or different.
Since he therefore had before his eyes solely their concepts, and not
their position in the intuition in which alone the objects can be given,
and left entirely out of consideration the transcendental place of these
concepts (whether the object C is to be counted among appearances or
among things in themselves), it could not have turned out otherwise but
that he extended his principle of indiscernibles,d which holds merely of
concepts of things in general, to the objects of the senses (mundus
phaenomenon),e and thereby believed himself to have made no little ada

b
,

Verkniipfong
Using a comma as in the first edition rather than a period as in the second.

Object

d That is, the principle of the identity of indiscernibles.

, phenomenal world

3 72

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

vance in the cognition of nature. Of course, if ! know a drop of water as
a thing in itself according to all of its inner determinations, I cannot let
any one drop count as different from another if the entire concept of
the former is identical with that of the latter. But if it is an appearance
in space, then it has its place not merely in the understanding (under
concepts), but also in the sensible outer intuition (in space), and since
the physical places are entirely indifferent with regard to the inner de­
terminations of the things, a place = b can just as readily accept a thing
that is fully similar and equal to another in a place = a as it could if the
former were ever so internally different from the latter. Without fur­
ther conditions, the difference in place already makes the multiplicity
and distinction of objects as appearances not only possible in itself but
also necessary. Thus that putative law is no law of nature. It is simply an
analytical rule or comparison of things through mere concepts.
Second, the principle that realities (as mere affirmations) never logically oppose each other is an entirely true proposition about the relations o f concepts, but signifies nothing a t all either in regard to nature
nor overall in regard to anything in itself (of this we have no concept).
For real opposition always obtains where A B = 0, i.e., where one reality, if combined in one subject with another, cancels out the effect of
the latter, which is unceasingly placed before our eyes by all hindrances
and countereffects in nature, which, since they rest on forces, must be
called realitates phaenomena.a General mechanics can even provide the
empirical condition of this opposition in aD a priori rule by looking to
the opposition of directions - a condition about which the transcendental concept of reality knows nothing at all. 1 06 Although Herr von
Leibniz did not exactly announce this proposition with the pomp of a
new principle, he nevertheless used it for new assertions, and his successors expressly incorporated it into their Leibnizian-Wolffian doctrine. According to this principle, e.g., all ills are nothing but conse­
quences of the limits of created beings, i.e., negations, since these are
the only opposing things in reality (this is really so in the concept of a
thing in general, but not in things as appearances).107 Similarly, its adherents find it not merely possible but also natural to unite all reality in
one being without any worry about opposition, since they do not recognize any opposition except that of contradiction (through which the
concept of a thing would itself be canceled out), lOS and do not recognize
the opposition of reciprocal destruction, where one real ground cancels
out the effect of another, the conditions for the representation of which
we find only in sensibility.
Third, the Leibnizian monadology has no ground at all other than
the fact that this philosopher represented the distinction of the inner

A 273
B 329

-

n phenomenal realities

373

B 330
A 2 74

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

and outer merely in relation to the understanding. Substances in gen­
eral must have something inner, which is therefore free of all outer re­
lations, consequently also of composition. The simple is therefore the
foundation of the inner in things in themselves. But that which is inner
in their state cannot consist in place, shape, contact, or motion (which
determinations are all outer relations), and we can therefore attribute to
the substances no other inner state than that through which we inter­
nally determine our sense itself, namely the state of representations.
This completes the monads, which are to constitute the fundamental
matter of the entire universe, the active power of which, however, con­
sists merely in representations, through which they are properly effica­
cious merely within themselves.
For this very reason, however, his principlea of the possible commu­
nity of substances among themselves also had to be predetermined
harmony and could not be a physical influence. 1 09 For since everything
is only internal, i.e., occupied with its own representations, the state of
the representations of one substance could not stand in any efficacious
connection at all with that of another, but some third cause influencing
all of them had to make their states correspond to one another, not, to
be sure, through occasional assistance specially brought about in each
case (systema assistentiae),b but rather through the unity of the idea of one
cause valid for all, from which, in accordance with general laws, they
must all together acquire their existence and persistence, thus also their
reciprocal correspondence with each other.
Fourth, Leibniz's famous doctrine of space and time, in which he
intellectualized these forms of sensibility, arose solely from this very
same deception of transcendental reflection. If I would represent outer
relations of things through the mere understanding, this can be done
only by means of a concept of their reciprocal effect, and should I con­
nect one state of the one and the same thing with another state, then
this can only be done in the order of grounds and consequences. Thus
Leibniz thought of space as a certain order in the community of sub­
stances, and thought of time as the dynamic sequence of their states.IIO
The uniqueness and independence from things, however, which both of
these seem to have in themselves, he ascribed to the confusion of these
concepts, which made that which is a mere form of dynamical relations
be taken for an intuition subsisting by itself and preceding the things
themselves. Thus space and time became the intelligible form of the
connection of the things (substances and their states) in themselves.
The things, however, were intelligible substances (substantiae noumena).
Nevertheless he wanted to make these concepts valid for appearances,
" Principium
b "System of assistance," i.e., the occasionalism of Nicolas Malebranche.
3 74

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

since he conceded to sensibility no kind of intuition of its own, but
rather sought everything in the understanding, even the empirical rep­
resentation of objects, and left nothing for the senses but the con­
temptible occupation of confusing and upsetting the representations of
the former.
But even if we could say anything synthetically about things in
themselves through the pure understanding (which is nevertheless im­
possible), this still could not be related to appearances at all, which do
not represent things in themselves. In this latter case, therefore, I will
always have to compare my concepts in transcendental reflection only
under the conditions of sensibility, and thus space and time will not be
determinations of things in themselves, but of appearances; what the
things may be in themselves I do not know, and also do not need to
know, since a thing can never come before me except in appearance.
I proceed in the same way with the other concepts of reflection.
Matter is substantia phaenomenon.a What pertains to it internally I seek
in all parts of space that it occupies and in all effects that it carries out,
and which can certainly always be only appearances of outer sense. I
therefore have nothing absolutely but only comparatively internal,
which itself in turn consists of outer relations. Yet the absolutely inter­
nal in matter, according to pure understanding, is a mere fancy, for it is
nowhere an object for the pure understanding; the transcendental ob­
ject,b however, which might be the ground of this appearance that we
call matter, is a mere something, about which we would not understand
what it is even if someone could tell us. For we cannot understand any­
thing except that which has something corresponding to our words in
intuition. If the complaints "That we have no insight into the inner
in things"!I I are to mean that we do not understand through pure rea­
son what the things that appear to us might be in themselves, then they
are entirely improper and irrational; for they would have us be able to
cognize things, thus intuit them, even without senses, consequently
they would have it that we have a faculty of cognition entirely distinct
from the human not merely in degree but even in intuition and kind,
and thus that we ought to be not humans but beings that we cannot
even say are possible, let alone how they are constituted. Observation
and analysis of the appearances penetrate into what is inner in nature,
and one cannot know how far this will go in time. Those transcenden­
tal questions, however, that go beyond nature, we will never be able to
answer, even if all of nature is revealed to us, sinceC it is never given to
a

phenomenal substance

b Object

, Following the second edition, reading da instead of undo In his copy of the first edition,
Kant substituted weil for und (E, p. 45)·

375

A277
B 333

A278
B 3 34

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

us to observe our own mind with any other intuition that that of our
inner sense. For in that lies the mystery of the origin of our sensibility.
Its relationa to an object, b and what might be the transcendental ground
of this unity, undoubtedly lie too deeply hidden for us, who know even
ourselves only through inner sense, thus as appearance, to be able to use
such an unsuitable tool of investigation to find out anything except al­
ways more appearances, even though we would gladly investigate their
non-sensible cause.
What makes this critique of the inferences from the mere actions of
reflection useful above all is that it clearly establishes the nullity of all in­
ferences about objects that one simply compares with each other in the
understanding, and at the same time confirms what we have chiefly em­
phasized: that although appearances cannot be comprehended among
the objectsC of pure understanding as things in themselves, they are nev­
ertheless the only things by means of which our cognition can have ob­
jective reality, namely, where intuition corresponds to the concepts.
If we reflect merely logically, then we simply compare our concepts
with each other in the understanding, seeing whether two of them con­
tain the very same thing, whether they contradict each other or not,
whether something is contained in the concept internally or is added to
it, and which of them should count as given and which as a manner of
thinking of that which is given. But if I apply these concepts to an ob­
ject in general (in the transcendental sense),d without further determin­
ing whether this is an object of sensible or intellectual intuition, then
limitations (which do not flow from this concept) immediately show up,
which pervert all empirical use of them, and by that very means prove
that the representation of an object as a thing in general is not merely
insufficient but rather, without sensible determinations of it and inde­
pendent of an empirical condition, contradictory in itself, thus that
one must either abstract from any object (in logic), or else, if one as­
sumes an object, then one must think it under conditions of sensible in­
tuition; thus the intelligible would require an entirely special intuition,
which we do not have, and in the absence of this would be nothing for
us, though on the contrary appearances also cannot be objects in them­
selves. For, if I think of mere things in general, then the difference in
the outer relations certainly does not constitute a difference in the
thingse themselves, but rather presupposes this, and, if the concept of
the one is not internally distinct from that of the other, then I merely
a Beziehung
b Object
, Objecten
d Verstande
, Sacben
376

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

posit one and the same thing in different relations. Further, through the
addition of one mere affirmation (reality) to another the positive is in­
creased, and nothing is taken away from it or canceled out; hence the
real in things in general cannot contradict each other, etc.
* * *

As we have shown, through a certain misinterpretation the concepts
of reflection have had such an influence on the use of the understand­
ing that they have even been able to seduce one of the most acute of all
philosophers into a supposed system of intellectual cognition, which
undertakes to determine its object without supplementation by the
senses. For just this reason the exposition of the deceptive cause of the
amphiboly of these concepts, as the occasion of false principles, is of
great utility in reliably determining and securing the boundaries of the
understanding.
One must say, to be sure, that whatever pertains to or contradicts a
concept in general also pertains to or contradicts everything particular
that is contained under that concept (dictum de Omni et Nullo);a," 2 but it
would be absurd to alter this logical principle so that it would read:
"\Vhatever is not contained in a general concept is also not contained
in the particular ones that stand under it"; for the latter are particular
concepts precisely because they contain more than is thought in the
general concept. Yet Leibniz's entire intellectual system is really built
on the latter principle: it therefore falls together with it, along with all
of the ambiguity in the use of the understanding that arises from it.
The principle of indiscernibles is really based on the presupposition
that if a certain distinction is not to be found in the concept of a thing
in general, then it is also not to be found in the things themselves; con­
sequently all things are completely identical (numero eadem)b that are
not already distinguished from each other in their concepts (as to quality or quantity). But since in the mere concept of anything abstraction
is made from many necessary conditions of an intuition, it is with peculiar haste that that from which abstraction has been made is taken as
something that is not to be encountered at all, and nothing conceded to
the thing except what is contained in its concept.
The concept of a cubic foot of space, wherever and however often I
think it, i s i n itself always completely the same. Yet two cubic feet are
nevertheless distinguished in space merely through their locations (numero diversa);' these are conditions of the intuition in which the objectd
a principle of All or Nothing

b "the same in number," i.e., even numerically identical.
, numerically diverse

d

Object
3 77

B 337
A28I

B 3 38
A282

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. II. Appendix

of this concept is given, which do not belong to the concept but to the
entire sensibility. In the same way, there is no contradiction at all in the
concept of a thing if nothing negative is connected with something af­
firmative, and merely affirmative concepts cannot, in combination, ef­
fect any cancellation. Yet in the sensible intuition in which reality (e.g.,
motion) is given, there are conditions (opposed directions), from which
one had abstracted in the concept of motion in general, that make pos­
sible a conflict, which is certainly not a logical one, that produces a zero
= 0 out of that which is entirely positive; and one could not say that all
reality is in agreement just because no conflict a is to be found among its
concepts.* According to mere concepts the inner is the substratum of all
relation or outer determinations. If, therefore, I abstract from all con­
ditions of intuition, and restrict myself solely to the concept of a thing
in general, then I can abstract from every outer relation, and yet there
must remain a concept of it, that signifies no relation but merely inner
determinations. Now it seems as if it follows from this that in every
thing (substance) there is something that is absolutely internal and pre­
cedes all outer determinations, first making them possible, thus that this
substratum is something that contains no more outer relations in itself,
consequently that it is simple (for corporeal things are still always only
relations, at least of the parts outside one another); and since we are not
acquainted with any absolutely inner determinations except through
our inner sense, this substratum would be not only simple, but also (ac­
cording to the analogy with our inner sense) determined through rep­
resentations, i.e., all things would really be monads, or simple beings
endowed with representations. " 3 And this would all be correct, were it
not that something more than the concept of a thing in general belongs
to the conditions under which alone objects of outer intuition can be
given to us, and from which the pure concept abstracts. For these show
that a persistent appearance in space (impenetrable extension) contains
mere relations and nothing absolutely internal, and nevertheless can be
the primary substratum of all outer perception. Through mere con­
cepts, of course, I cannot think of something external without anything

B 339

* If one wanted to make use of the usual escape here, that at least realitates
noumena cannot act in opposition to each other, one would still have to intro­
duce an example of such pure and non-sensible reality in order to understand
whether such a reality represents something or nothing at all. But no example
can be derived from anywhere except experience, which never offers more
than phaenomena, and thus this proposition signifies nothing more than that a
concept that contains only affirmations does not contain anything negative: a
proposition that we have never doubted.
a

Widerstreit
3 78

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

inner, for the very reason that relational concepts absolutely presuppose
given things and are not possible without these. But since something is
contained in the intuition that does not lie at all in the mere concept of
a thing in general, and this yields the substratum that cannot be cog­
nized through mere concepts, namely a space that, along with every­
thing that it contains, consists of purely formal or also real relations, I
cannot say that since without something absolutely inner no thing can
be represented through mere concepts, there is also nothing outer
that does not have something absolutely internal as its ground in the
things themselves that are contained under these concepts and in their
intuition. For if we have abstracted from all conditions of intuition,
then of course there remains nothing in the mere concept except the
inner in general, and its relation in that, through which alone the outer
is possible. But this necessity, which is grounded only on abstraction,
does not obtain in the case of things insofar as they are given in intuition with determinations that express mere relations without having
anything inner at their ground, since these are not things in themselves
but simply appearances. And whatever we can cognize only in matter is
pure relations (that which we call their inner determinations is only
comparatively internal); but there are among these some self-sufficient
and persistent ones, through which a determinate object is given to us.
The fact that if I abstract from these relations I have nothing further to
think at all does not cancel out the concept of a thing as appearance, nor
the concept of an object in abstracto, but does cancel all possibility of
such an object determinable in accordance with mere concepts, i.e., a
concept of a noumenon.a It is certainly startling to hear that a thing
should consist entirely of relations, but such a thing is also mere ap­
pearance, and cannot be thought at all through pure categories; it itself
consists in the mere relation of something in general to the senses. In
the same way, if one begins with mere concepts one cannot very well
think of the relations of things in abstracto except by thinking that one
is the cause of the determinations in the other; for that is our concept
of the understanding of relations itself. Yet since in this case we abstract
from all intuition, an entire way in which the manifold can determine
its place, namely the form of sensibility (space) disappears, which yet
precedes all empirical causality.
If by merely intelligible objects we understand those things that are
thoughtb through pure categories, without any schema of sensibility,
then things of this sort are impossible. For the condition of the objec­
tive use of all our concepts of understanding is merely the manner of
our sensible intuition, through which objects are given to us, and, if we
a

Not in roman type.

b Altered in Kant's copy of the first edition to "are cognized by us" (E eL, p. 46; 2 3 '49).
3 79

B 341

A 28 S

B 342

A 2 86

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. I. Bk. II. Appendix

B 34 3

A z 87

B 3 44

A z88

abstract from the latter, then the former have no relation a at all to any
sort of object.b Indeed, even if one would assume another sort of intu­
ition than this our sensible one, our functions for thinking would still
be without any significance in regard to it. If we understand thereby
only objects of a non-sensible intuition, of which our categories are cer­
tainly not valid, and of which we can therefore never have any cogni­
tion at all (neither intuition nor concept), then noumena in this merely
negative sense must of course be allowed: for they would then not say
anything but that our manner of intuition does not pertain to all things,
but only to objects of our senses, consequently that their objective va­
lidity is bounded, and room thus remains for some other sort of intu­
ition and therefore also for things as its objects.c But in that case the
concept of a noumenon is problematic, i.e., the representation of a thing
of which we can say neither that it is possible nor that it is impossible,
since we are acquainted with no sort of intuition other than our own
sensible one and no other sort of concepts than the categories, neither
of which, however, is suited to an extrasensible object. Hence we can­
not thereby positively expand the field of the objects of our thinking be­
yond the conditions of our sensibility, and assume beyond appearances
objects of pure thinking, i.e., noumena, since those do not have any
positive significance that can be given. For one must concede that the
categories alone are not sufficient for the cognition of things in them­
selves, and without the data of sensibility they would be merely subjec­
tive forms of the unity of the understanding, but without any object.
Thinking in itself, to be sure, is not a product of the senses, and to this
extent is also not limited by them, but it is not on that account imme­
diately of any independent and pure use, without assistance from sensi­
bility, for it is in that case without an object.d And one cannot call the
noumenon e such an object! for this signifies precisely the problematic
concept of an object for an entirely different intuition and an entirely
different understanding than our own, which is thus a problem itself.
The concept of the noumenong is therefore not the concept of an ob­
ject,h but rather the problem, unavoidably connected with the limitation
of our sensibility, of whether there may not be objects entirely exempt
from the intuition of our sensibility, a question that can only be given
a Beziehung
b Object
, Objecte
d Object

, Not in roman type.

f Object
g
h

Not in roman type.

Object

3 80

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

the indeterminate answer that since sensible intuition does not pertain
to all things without distinction room remains for more and other ob­
jects; they cannot therefore be absolutely denied, but in the absence of
a determinate concept (for which no category is serviceable) they also
cannot be asserted as objects for our understanding.
The understanding accordingly bounds sensibility without thereby
expanding its own field, and in warning sensibility not to presume to
reach for things in themselves but solely for appearances it thinks of an
object in itself, but only as a transcendental object,a which is the caus�
of appearance (thus not itself appearance), and that cannot be thought
of either as magnitude or as reality or as substance, etc. (since these con­
cepts always require sensible forms in which they determine an object);
it therefore remains completely unknown whether such an object is to
be encountered within or without us, whether it would be canceled out
along with sensibility or whether it would remain even if we took sensibility away. If we want to call this object b a noumenonC because the B 345
representation of it is nothing sensible, we are free to do so. But since
we caimot apply any of our concepts of the understanding to it, this rep­
resentation still remains empty for us, and serves for nothing but to designate the boundaries of our sensible cognition and leave open a space A 2 8 9
that we can fill up neither through possible experience nor through the
pure understanding.
The critique of this pure understanding thus does not allow us to create a new field of objects beyond those that can come before it as ap­
pearances, and to indulge in intelligible worlds, or even in the concept
of them. I The mistake that most obviously leads to this, and can certainly be excused though not justified, lies in this: that the use of the un­
derstanding, contrary to its vocation, d is made transcendental, and the
objects, i.e., possible intuitions, are made to conform themselves to
concepts, but concepts are not made to conform themselves to possible
intuitions (on which alone rests their objective validity). The cause of
this, however, is in turn that apperception and, with it, thinking precede
all possible determination of the arrangement of representations. We
therefore think something in general, and on the one side determine it
sensibly, only we also distinguish the object represented in general and B 346
in abstracto from this way of intuiting it; thus there remains to us a way
of determining it merely through thinking that is, to be sure, a merely
logical form without content, but that nevertheless seems to us to be a
a Object
b

Object

, Not in roman type.

d Bestimmung

381

Doctrine of Elements. Pt. II. Div. 1. Bk. II. Appendix

way in which the objecta exists in itself (noumenon), without regard to
the intuition to which our sensibility is limited.
* * *

A 290

B 347

Before we leave the Transcendental Analytic behind, we must add
something that, although not in itself especially indispensable, never­
theless may seem requisite for the completeness of the system. The
highest concept with which one is accustomed to begin a transcenden­
tal philosophy is usually the division between the possible and the im­
possible. "4 But since every division presupposes a concept that is to be
divided, a still higher one must be given, and this is the concept of an
object in general (taken problematically, leaving undecided whether it is
something or nothing). Since the categories are the only concepts that
relate to objects in general, the distinction of whether an object is some­
thing or nothing must proceed in accordance with the order and guid­
ance of the categories.b, l l s
I) To the concepts of all, many, and one there is opposed the con­
cept of that which cancels everything out, i.e., none, and thus the
object of a concept to which no intuition that can be given corre­
sponds is nothing, i e., a concept without an object, like the
noumena, which cannot be counted among the possibilities al­
though they must not on that ground be asserted to be impossible
(ens rationis),c or like something such as certain new fundamental
forces, which one thinks, without contradiction, to b e sure, but
also without any example from experience even being thought, and
which must therefore not be counted among the possibilities.
2) Reality is something, negation is nothing, namely, a concept of
the absence of an object, such as a shadow or cold (nihilprivativum). d
3) The mere form of intuition, without substance, is in itself not
an object, but the merely formal condition of one (as appearance),
like pure space and pure time, which are to be sure something, as
the forms for intuiting, but are not in themselves objects that are
intuited (ens imaginarium).e
4) The object of a concept that contradicts itself is nothing be­
cause the concept is nothing, the impossible, like a rectilinear fig­
ure with two sides (nihil negativum)/
==

A 29 1

B 348

a Object
b In�erted in Kant's copy of the first edition: "the highest concept is that of the object in

general" (E CLI, p. 46; 2 3 : 3 8).
being of mere reason
d A privative nothing, i.e., a condition consisting solely in the absence of something else.
, An imaginary being; in the first edition, this expression is inserted after "pure time."
f a negative nothing
,

382

On the amphiboly of concepts of reflection

The table of this division of the concept of nothing (for the similar
division of "something" follows of itself) must therefore be laid out
thus:
Nothing,
as
I.

Empty concept without object,
ens rationis.
2.

3·
Empty intuition
without an object,
ens imaginarium.

Empty object
of a concept,
nihil privativum.
4·

Empty object without concept,
nihil negativum.

One sees that the thought-entity (No. I) is distinguished from the nonentity (No. 4) by the fact that the former may not be ccunted among
the possibilities because it is a mere invention (although not self-con­
tradictory), whereas the latter is opposed to possibility because even its
concept cancels itself out. Both, however, are empty concepts. The nihil
privativum (NO. 2) and the ens imaginarium (No. 3), on the contrary, are
empty data for concepts. If light were not given to the senses, then one
would also not be able to represent darkness, and if extended beings
were not perceived, one would not b e able to represent space. Negation
as well as the mere form of intuition are, without something real, not
objects.o
a Objecte

333

B 349
