
IV.6
karma-asukla-akrsnam yogina trividham itaresam

IV.7
tatas tad-vipaka-anugunanam eva-abhivyakti vasananam

A. ABSOLUTE GROUND

a. Form and essence

b. Form and matter

c. Form and content

IV.8
jati-desa-kala vyavahitanam api-anantaryam smrti-samskarayo eka-rupatvat

IV.9
tasam anaditvam ca-asisa nityatvat

B. DETERMINATE GROUND

a. Formal ground

b. Real ground

c. Complete ground

IV.10
hetu-phala-asraya-alambana sangrhitatvad esam abhave tad-abhava

C. CONDITION

a. The relatively unconditioned

b. The absolutely unconditioned

c. Procession of the fact into concrete existence

IV.13
parinama-ekatvad vastu-tattvam

A. THE THING AND ITS PROPERTIES

Concrete existence as a concrete existent is posited in
the form of the negative unity which it essentially is.
But this negative unity is at first only immediate determination,
hence the oneness of the something in general.
But the concretely existent something is different
from the something that exists immediately.
The former is essentially an immediacy that has arisen
through the reflection of mediation into itself.
The concretely existent something is thus a thing.

The thing is distinct from its concrete existence
just as the something can be distinguished from its being.
The thing and the concrGete existent
are immediately one and the same.
But because concrete existence is not
the first immediacy of being
but has the moment of mediation within it,
its further determination as thing
and the distinguishing of the two is
not a transition but truly an analysis.
Concrete existence as such contains
this very distinction in the moment of its mediation:
the distinction of thing-in-itself
and external concrete existence.

a. The thing in itself and concrete existence

1. The thing in itself is the concrete existent
as the essential immediate that has resulted
from the sublated mediation.
Mediation is therefore equally essential to it;
but this distinction in this first or immediate concrete
existence falls apart into indifferent determinations.
The one side, namely the mediation of the thing,
is its non-reflected immediacy,
and hence its being in general;
and this being, since it is at the same time determined as mediation,
is an existence which is other to itself,
manifold and external within itself.
But it is not just immediate existence;
it also refers to the sublated mediation
and the essential immediacy;
it is therefore immediate existence
as unessential, as positedness.
(When the thing is differentiated from its concrete existence,
it is then the possible, the thing of representation,
or the thing of thought,
which as such is at the same time not supposed to exist.
However, the determination of possibility
and of the opposition of the thing
and its concrete existence comes later.)
But the thing-in-itself and its mediated being are
both contained in the concrete existence,
and both are themselves concrete existences;
the thing-in-itself exists concretely
and is the essential concrete existence,
but the mediated being is
the thing's unessential concrete existence.

This determinateness of the thing-in-itself is
the property of the thing.

b. Property

Quality is the immediate determinateness of something;
the negative itself by virtue of which being is something.
The property of the thing is, for its part,
the negativity of reflection,
by virtue of which concrete existence in
general is a concrete existent
and, as simple self-identity, is thing-in-itself.
But the negativity of reflection, the sublated mediation,
is itself essentially mediation and reference,
though not to an other in general like quality
which is not reflected determinateness;
it is rather reference to itself as to an other,
or mediation which immediately is no less self-identity.
The abstract thing-in-itself is itself this relation
which turns from another back to itself;
it is thereby determined in itself;
but its determinateness is constitution,
which is as such itself determination,
and in relating to the other
it does not pass over into otherness
and  is excluded from alteration.


c. The reciprocal action of things

The thing-in-itself exists in concreto by essence;
external immediacy and determinateness
belong to its being-in-itself,
or to its immanent reflection.
The thing in-itself is thus a thing that has properties,
and hence there are a number of things distinct from one another,
not because of some viewpoint alien to them but through themselves.

IV.14
vastu-samye citta-bhedat tayo vibhakta pantha

B. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE THING OUT OF MATTERS

The transition of property into a matter
or into a self-subsistent stuff is the familiar
transition performed on sensible matter by chemistry
when it seeks to represent the properties of color, smell, etc.,
as luminous matter, coloring matter, odorific matter,
sour, bitter matter and so on;
or when it simply assumes others,
like calorific matter, electrical, magnetic matter,
in the conviction that it has thereby gotten hold
of properties as they truly are.
Equally current is the saying that
things consist of various matters or stuffs.
One is careful about calling these matters or stuffs “things,”
even though one will readily admit that,
for example, a pigment is a thing;
but I do not know whether luminous matter,
for instance, or calorific matter,
or electrical matter, etc., are called things.
The distinction is made between things and their components
without any exact statement as to whether these components also,
and to what extent, are things or perhaps just half-things;
but they are at least concretes in general.


IV.15
na ca-eka-citta-tantram vastu tad apramanakam tada kim syat

C. DISSOLUTION OF THE THING

This thing, in the manner it has determined itself
as the merely quantitative combination of free matters,
is the absolutely alterable.
Its alteration consists in one or more matters
being dropped from the collection,
or being added to this “also,”
or in the rearrangement of the matters'
respective quantitative ratio.
The coming-to-be and the passing-away of this thing is
the external dissolution of such an external bond,
or the binding of such for which it is indifferent
whether they are bound or not.
The stuffs circulate unchecked in or out of “this” thing,
and the thing itself is absolute porosity
without measure or form of its own.

In “this” thing, concrete existence has attained its completion,
namely, that it is at once being that exists in itself,
or independent subsistence, and unessential concrete existence.
The truth of concrete existence is thus this:
that it has its in-itself in unessentiality,
or that it subsists in an other,
indeed in the absolute other,
or that it has its own nothingness for substrate.
It is, therefore, appeara

YS II.6
drg-darsana-saktyor ekatmatevasmita
